## Appendix to Chapter 11

### The different cittas accompanied by pīti 


Four types of lobha-mūla-citta are accompanied by pīti, namely the types
which are accompanied by somanassa. Two types of ahetuka citta are
accompanied by pīti, the santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka and
which investigates an extraordinarily pleasant object and the
hasituppāda-citta, the smile-producing ahetuka kiriyacitta of the
arahat. Moreover, pīti accompanies four types of mahā-kusala cittas,
four types of mahā-vipākacittas and four types of mahā-kiriyacittas,
thus, twelve types of kāmāvacara sobhana cittas. As regards jhānacittas,
pīti accompanies the rūpāvacara kusala cittas, the rūpāvacara
vipākacittas and the rūpāvacara kiriyacittas of the first three stages
of jhāna ( of the five-fold system), thus, nine types of rūpāvacara
cittas. When lokuttara jhānacittas, lokuttara cittas accompanied by
jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna, are taken into account,
lokuttara cittas are classified as forty. Since pīti does not arise in
the fourth and fifth stage of jhāna, only the lokuttara cittas arising
with jhāna-factors of three stages of jhāna are accompanied by pīti.
Thus, twenty-four types of lokuttara cittas in all (three times eight)
are accompanied by pīti.

If we count cittas as hundred and twenty-one (including forty lokuttara
cittas), the cittas accompanied by pīti are summarized as follows:

- 4 akusala cittas
- 2 ahetuka cittas
- 12 kāmāvacara sobhana cittas
- 9 rūpāvacara cittas
- 24 lokuttara cittas

—altogether: 51 cittas