Attachment (lobha)
------------------

Akusala dhammas are altogether different from kusala dhammas. Akusala
dhammas are impure, they are dangerous and they lead to sorrow. As we
have seen, there are four akusala cetasikas which arise with every
akusala citta: moha (ignorance), ahirika (shamelessness), anottappa
(recklessness) and uddhacca (restlessness). Apart from these four
akusala cetasikas there are several other akusala cetasikas which can
accompany akusala citta.

Lobha, attachment or greed, is another akusala cetasika. Lobha does not
arise with every akusala citta, it can arise only with eight types of
citta, the eight types of lobha-mūla-citta[(94)](#FOOT94). Lobha is a
“root”, hetu. The lobha-mūla-cittas have both moha and lobha as their
roots.

The *Dhammasangaṇi* (par1059), in the section where it deals with lobha
as hetu, gives a long list of different names for lobha in order to
illustrate its different shades and aspects. Lobha is compared to a
creeper, it strangles its victim such as a creeper strangles a tree. It
is like the ocean, it is insatiable. Lobha can be coarse or it can be
more subtle such as hoping or expecting. It is a “bondage” because it
binds beings in the round of births. It is a depravity because it
corrupts the mind[(95)](#FOOT95).

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 162) gives the following definition of lobha:
…greed has the characteristic of grasping an object like “monkey lime”.
Its function is sticking, like meat put in a hot pan. It is manifested
as not giving up, like the dye of lamp-black. Its proximate cause is
seeing enjoyment in things that lead to bondage. Swelling with the
current of craving, it should be regarded as taking (beings) with it to
states of loss, as a swift-flowing river does to the great ocean.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 249) gives a similar
definition[(96)](#FOOT96).

Greed has the characteristic of grasping like monkey lime. Monkey lime
was used by hunters in order to catch monkeys. We read in the *Kindred
Sayings* (V, Mahā-vagga, Book III, Chapter I, par7, The monkey) that a
hunter sets a trap of lime for monkeys. Monkeys who are free from “folly
and greed” do not get trapped. We read:

> …But a greedy, foolish monkey comes up to the pitch and handles it
> with one paw, and his paw sticks fast in it. Then, thinking: I’ll free
> my paw, he seizes it with the other paw, but that too sticks fast. To
> free both paws he seizes them with one foot, and that too sticks fast.
> To free both paws and the one foot, he lays hold of them with the
> other foot, but that too sticks fast. To free both paws and both feet
> he lays hold of them with his muzzle: but that too sticks fast.
>
> So that monkey thus trapped in five ways lies down and howls, thus
> fallen on misfortune…

In this way the hunter can catch him and roast him over the fire. The
Buddha explained to the monks that the monk who is not mindful gets
trapped by the “five sensual elements”: visible object, sound, scent,
savour and tangible object. When one is taken in by these objects, “Māra
gets access”[(97)](#FOOT97). Clinging is dangerous, it leads to one’s
own destruction. Are we at this moment taken in by one of the “five
sensual elements”? Then we are in fact “trapped”. At the moment of lobha
we enjoy the object of clinging and we do not see that lobha makes us
enslaved, we do not see the danger of lobha. Therefore it is said that
the proximate cause of lobha is seeing enjoyment in things that lead to
bondage. Growing into a river of craving, lobha takes us to the “states
of loss”. Lobha can motivate unwholesome deeds which are capable of
producing an unhappy rebirth. So long as lobha has not been eradicated
we are subject to birth, old age, sickness and death.

Lobha is attached to many different kinds of objects and it has many
degrees. Different names can denote the cetasika which is lobha. Rāga
(greed), abhijjā (covetousness) and taṇhā (craving) are other names for
lobha. When lobha is coarse it motivates akusala kamma patha
(unwholesome course of action) through body, speech or mind. Because of
lobha one may commit many kinds of bad deeds in order to obtain what one
desires. If the degree of akusala is such that it motivates an evil
deed, the result of it may be an unhappy rebirth or unpleasant
experiences through the senses in the course of life. Lobha can motivate
akusala kamma pathas through the body, which are stealing and sexual
misbehaviour, and akusala kamma pathas through speech which are lying,
slandering and idle talk. Lobha can motivate *covetousness* or
*abhijjā,* the desire to take away someone else’s property, which is
akusala kamma patha through the mind. Moreover, when it is accompanied
by diṭṭhi, it can motivate certain kinds of wrong view which are akusala
kamma patha through the mind[(98)](#FOOT98). As regards covetousness,
the *Atthasālinī* (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 249) states that it should be
regarded as the outstretched hand of the mind (reaching) for others’
prosperity. If one merely wishes to have someone else’s property but
does not plan to take it away, greed is not akusala kamma patha. There
are many degrees of greed and only when one really plans to take away
someone else’s property it is akusala kamma patha through the
mind[(99)](#FOOT99).

We may not have the intention to steal, but our wish to obtain something
for ourselves can condition behaviour and speech which is not sincere.
The *Book of Analysis* (Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, par851) speaks about
people who have “evil wishes”, that is, who pretend to have qualities
they do not possess; they may pretend to be virtuous, wise and even
without defilements. The monk may behave in a hypocritical way in order
to obtain requisites. The *Vibhaṅga* (par861, 862) gives us striking
examples of “guile” and “insinuating talk”:

Therein, what is “guile”? In one who depends on gain, honour and fame,
who has evil wishes, who is troubled by wishes: by the so called using
of the requisites, by talking allusively, by the setting up or by the
arranging or by the proper arranging of the posture: there is knitting
the brows, act of knitting the brows, guile, being guileful, state of
being guileful. This is called guile.

Therein, what is “insinuating talk”? In one who depends on gain, honour
and fame, who has evil wishes, who is troubled by wishes: that which to
others is welcoming talk, insinuating talk, entertaining talk, laudatory
talk, flattering talk, inferential talk, repeated inferential talk,
coaxing talk, repeated coaxing talk, constant pleasant talk, servility
(in talking), beansoupery (in talking), dandling (behaviour). This is
called insinuating talk.

“Beansoupery” is talk of which only a little is true, the rest being
false, just as in beansoup, only a few beans do not get cooked, and the
greater part gets cooked[(100)](#FOOT100).

These passages are also excellent reminders for laypeople: one may have
lovely manners but in reality one may be full of hypocrisy and pretence.
Pleasant speech can easily have selfish motives. Don’t we want to be
popular, to be liked by others? In order to endear ourselves to others
we may even tell lies or slander. When there is mindfulness of the
present reality we can find out whether our nice way of speaking is in
reality flattering and coaxing talk or not. Through mindfulness we can
become more sincere in our behaviour.

There is lobha, not only when we want to obtain things, but also when we
enjoy pleasant sights, sounds, smells, flavours, tangible objects and
mental objects. Don’t we like softness while we are sitting or lying
down? When we sit on a hard floor we have aversion, and when we sit in a
comfortable chair we find it agreeable and then there is lobha. Are we
not attached to temperature, to the temperature which is just right for
us: not too hot, not too cold? When we drink coffee or tea we want it to
be of the temperature we like. When eating and drinking we are attached
not only to flavour, but also to temperature. And don’t we like the
smell of our food, the sight of it and the softness or hardness of it?
There is bound to be attachment through each of the six doors, time and
again.

Lobha may be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling.
When it is accompanied by pleasant feeling there is enthusiasm (pīti) as
well. When there is pleasant feeling we are delighted with it and then
pleasant feeling becomes another object of attachment. When there is
attachment there is also ignorance, shamelessness, recklessness and
restlessness (uddhacca). Ignorance does not see the true nature of the
object of clinging, it does not see that it is only a conditioned
reality which does not stay. Shamelessness is not ashamed of akusala and
recklessness does not see its danger. Restlessness is instability due to
akusala, it prevents the citta from applying itself to kusala.

Lobha can be accompanied by indifferent feeling and then it is not as
intense as when it is accompanied by pleasant feeling. When we want to
go somewhere or want to do something, lobha is likely to arise, but it
may not always be accompanied by pleasant feeling, there may be
indifferent feeling instead. Lobha-mūla-citta with indifferent feeling
is likely to arise countless times, but we are so ignorant, we do not
notice it.

All degrees of lobha are dangerous, even the more subtle forms of lobha.
When we do evil deeds which harm others it is evident that lobha is
dangerous. But when lobha is only enjoyment of a pleasant sight or sound
and we do not harm other people, we find it harder to see the danger of
lobha. Lobha, be it gross or more subtle, makes us enslaved. When there
is lobha we cling to the object which is experienced at that moment and
we take it for happiness. The next moment the pleasant object is gone
and then we are likely to have aversion. The Buddha reminded people of
the futility of sense-pleasures. We read in the *Dhammapada* (verses
146-149):


                                      
 ```
 What is laughter, what is joy, when  the world is ever burning?           
 Shrouded by darkness, do you not seek a light?                           
 Behold this beautiful body, a mass of sores, a heaped-up (lump), 
 diseased, much thought of, in which  
 nothing lasts, nothing persists.            
 Thoroughly worn out is this body, 
 a nest of diseases, perishable;        
 This putrid mass breaks up; truly life ends in death. 
                   
 ```                                  


Lobha is extremely hard to eradicate because it has been accumulated,
also in past lives; it is deeply rooted. Even when we have studied the
Dhamma and we have heard about the dangers of lobha we still want
pleasant things for ourselves. We want possessions and we are attached
to people. At the moment of attachment we do not realize that all the
things we desire are susceptible to change, that they cannot last.

We read in the *Middle Length Sayings* (I, no. 26), in the “Discourse on
the Ariyan Quest”, that the Buddha spoke to the monks about the ariyan
quest and the unariyan quest. The unariyan quest is the seeking of all
the things which are impermanent. The Buddha spoke about things which
are “liable to birth”. Birth is followed by decay and death. Whatever is
born, what has arisen because of conditions, has to fall away, it cannot
be true happiness. We read:

> …And what monks, is the unariyan quest? As to this, monks, someone,
> liable to birth because of self, seeks what is likewise liable to
> birth; being liable to ageing because of self, seeks what is likewise
> liable to ageing; being liable to decay because of self…being liable
> to dying because of self…being liable to sorrow because of self…being
> liable to stain because of self, seeks what is likewise liable to
> stain. And what, monks, would you say is liable to birth? Sons and
> wife, monks, are liable to birth, women-slaves and men-slaves are
> liable to birth, goats and sheep are liable to birth, cocks and swine
> are liable to birth, elephants, cows, horses and mares are liable to
> birth, gold and silver are liable to birth. These attachments, monks,
> are liable to birth; yet this (man), enslaved, infatuated, addicted,
> being liable to birth because of self, seeks what is likewise liable
> to birth…

It is then explained that all the things which are mentioned as being
liable to birth are also liable to ageing, disease, dying, sorrow and
stain. We are attached to family, possessions, gold and silver, to
everything we believe can give us pleasure. We long for what is pleasant
and we have aversion when we do not get what we want. Our attachment is
a source of endless frustrations. Further on in the sutta we read that
the person who sees the peril of all the things which are impermanent
seeks “the unborn, uttermost security from the bonds- nibbāna”. This is
the ariyan quest. We may understand the disadvantage of lobha, but lobha
cannot be eradicated immediately. This sutta can remind us to develop
right understanding of realities, since this can eventually lead to the
eradication of lobha.

The Buddha taught people to be mindful of whatever reality appears. When
akusala dhamma appears it can be object of awareness and right
understanding. Some people may feel guilty when there is attachment to
pleasant things and they may be inclined to think that they should not
be mindful of lobha. If we have accumulations for arts such as painting
or music should we give these up in order to develop vipassanā? That
would not be the right practice. We should know the realities of our
daily life. One person has accumulations for art, another is skilful in
cooking or writing, we all have different accumulations. A layman does
not live the monk’s life, he could not force himself to live as a monk.
We should develop understanding in our daily life, because then we will
see that whatever arises, does so because of its own conditions.

The characteristic of lobha can be known only when it appears. When we
help someone else there are likely to be many moments of attachment in
between the moments of true generosity. Are we pleased to be in the
company of the person we help, are we attached to him? Are we pleased
with “our own” kusala and do we expect something in return for our
kindness? Mindfulness of realities is the only way to know the different
moments of wholesomeness and unwholesomeness more clearly. Mindfulness
will prevent us from deluding ourselves.

There may be attachment even to kusala, to calm or to mindfulness, sati.
We want to have a great deal of sati and we want it to last, but wanting
to have sati is not sati, it is clinging. We should not avoid being
aware of such clinging when it appears, because only if we know it as it
is can it be eradicated.

There are time and again experiences through the different doorways.
There is seeing, hearing, the experience of tangible object or thinking.
It seems that all these experiences arise immediately one after the
other. However, they arise in different processes and in these processes
there are “javana-cittas”[(101)](#FOOT101) which are either kusala
cittas or akusala cittas. For example, shortly after hearing, which is
vipākacitta (result of kamma), has arisen and fallen away, there may be
attachment to sound, and then there are lobha-mūla-cittas, performing
the function of javana. Even during the sense-door process, before the
object is experienced through the mind-door, lobha can arise. The
javana-cittas which arise in the different processes of cittas,
experiencing objects through the six doors, are more often akusala
cittas then kusala cittas, but we are ignorant of them. After a
sense-object such as sound is experienced through the ear-door, it is
experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door process. The cittas arising
in the mind-door process which follows upon the sense-door process, in
this case the ear-door process, merely experience the sound, they do not
think about it, and they do not know what kind of sound it is. After
that process there can be other mind-door processes of cittas which
think of the source of the sound, of the meaning of it, of concepts. The
thinking of concepts after the seeing, hearing or the experiences
through the other sense-doors, is usually done with lobha, even if we do
not feel particularly glad. When we, for example, after hearing a sound,
know that it is the sound of a bird, this is not hearing but thinking,
and this is usually done with lobha. We want to know the meaning of what
we hear. We want to know the meaning of all we have experienced through
the senses. When we pay attention to the shape and form of things, after
the seeing, there is thinking of concepts, which is usually done with
clinging. We *like* to notice all the familiar things around us, we
would not like to miss noticing them. Thus, we have many moments of
clinging arising in sense-door processes and mind-door processes; we
have many more moments of lobha than we ever thought and it is
beneficial to realize this. It can remind us to be aware of the
different realities which appear in order to know them as they are.

The Buddha reminded people of the many forms of lobha in order to help
them to develop right understanding. This is the aim of the many
classifications of realities we find in the scriptures. *Taṇhā*, for
example, is another word which denotes lobha. Taṇhā is usually
translated as craving. Taṇhā can be classified in the following
way[(102)](#FOOT102):

-   kāma-taṇhā or sensuous craving
-   bhava-taṇhā or craving for existence
-   vibhava-taṇhā or craving for non-existence

Kāma-taṇhā is craving for the sense-objects which are experienced
through the six doors as well as craving for kāmāvacara cittas (cittas
of the sense-sphere) and the accompanying cetasikas. We cling not only
to visible object or sound but also to seeing and hearing. We want to
see and hear, we want to go on experiencing objects through the senses.
Kāma-taṇhā may be accompanied by wrong view or it may be unaccompanied
by wrong view.

Bhāva-taṇhā is craving for becoming. This kind of clinging may be
accompanied by wrong view or not. The kind of bhava-taṇhā which is
accompanied by wrong view, diṭṭhi, is “eternity view”, the belief that
realities last. Because of eternity view one believes that there is a
self who will continue to exist forever.

There may also be clinging to rebirth without the wrong view of self who
continues to exist. Clinging to the result of rūpa-jhāna (fine-material
jhāna), which is rebirth in a rūpa-brahma plane, and clinging to the
result of arūpa-jhāna (immaterial jhāna), which is rebirth in an
arūpa-brahma plane, are forms of clinging which are included in
bhava-taṇhā.

Vibhava-taṇhā, craving for non-becoming, is annihilation-belief which is
a kind of wrong view. This is the belief that there is a self who will
be annihilated after death. People who have this view do not see that so
long as there are conditions for the arising of nāma and rūpa, they will
arise again and again. Since they do not understand this they believe
that there is no rebirth.

There are different ways of classifying taṇhā. The *Visuddhimagga*
(XVII, 234-236) deals with *hundred-and-eight kinds of craving. There*
are six kinds of craving for the objects experienced through the six
doors, and each of these six kinds can be reckoned as threefold
according to its mode of occurrence as craving for sense-objects,
craving for becoming and craving for non-becoming. As regards craving
for becoming, the eternity view can arise in connection with what is
experienced through each of the six doors: there is the belief that
these objects last. As regards the craving for non-becoming, the
annihilation view can arise in connection with what is experienced
through each of the six doors. In this way one can count eighteen kinds
of craving. Moreover, there can be craving for “one’s own” colour or for
colour outside oneself and even so with regard to the other objects,
including the objects of craving for becoming and craving for
non-becoming. In this way one can count thirty six kinds of craving. If
one takes into account craving in the past, craving in the present and
craving in the future, there are one hundred-and-eight kinds of craving.
The different classifications of taṇhā remind us of the fact that there
are many kinds of clinging to different objects.

The sotāpanna ( the streamwinner, who has attained the first stage of
enlightenment) has eradicated clinging which is accompanied by wrong
view, but the other forms of clinging may still arise. The anāgāmī (the
non-returner, who has attained the third stage of enlightenment) has
eradicated all forms of sensuous clinging, but he still clings to birth.
He may cling to rūpa-jhāna and its result and to arūpa-jhāna and its
result. He has no “eternity view” because he is without wrong view. The
arahat has eradicated all kinds of clinging, he does not cling to any
kind of rebirth. For him there are no longer conditions for rebirth.

When there is mindfulness of the present object more often, we will see
more clearly how deep-rooted our clinging is. We can prove in this way
that the Abhidhamma teaches about realities. We will learn that there is
clinging to all the objects which are experienced through the six doors.

So long as there is clinging there will be birth, old age, sickness and
death. Desire is the second noble Truth, the origin of dukkha. We read
in the *Middle Length Sayings* (III, no. 141, the Analysis of the
Truths) that Sāriputta said to the monks about the second noble Truth:

And what, your reverences, is the ariyan truth of the arising of dukkha?
Whatever craving is connected with again-becoming, accompanied by
delight and attachment, finding delight in this and that, namely the
craving for sense-pleasures, the craving for becoming, the craving for
annihilation—this, your reverences, is called the ariyan truth of the
arising of dukkha.

Craving is one of the links in the “Dependent Origination”. Ignorance
and craving are the roots of the “wheel of becoming”, the cycle of birth
and death (*Visuddhimagga* XVII, 285).

In the *Thera-gāthā* (57, Kuṭivihārin 2) the kamma which produces
rebirth is symbolised by the building of a dwelling place, a hut. Who
still has desire to “build” will be reborn. A Thera did his studies in
an old hut. He thought: ”This old hut is now rotten; I ought to make
another”. So he turned his mind to new action (kamma). A spirit who was
seeking salvation said to him:


                                      
 ```                       
 This was an ancient hut, you say? To build                               
 Another hut, a new one, is your wish?                                    
 O cast away the longing for a hut!   
 New hut will bring new pain, monk, to you.  
                             
 ```                                  


When the Thera heard these words he was agitated, developed insight and
attained arahatship. For him there were no more conditions for rebirth,
since he was free from clinging.


### Questions

1.  Why is lobha-mūla-citta dangerous, even when it does not have the
    intensity to motivate bad deeds?
2.  Visible object is what appears through the eyes, it is not a
    “thing”. Can attachment to visible object arise during the eye-door
    process?
3.  Even the sotāpanna who has realized that phenomena are impermanent
    and non-self has attachment to pleasant things. How is that
    possible?
4.  Is bhava-taṇhā, craving for becoming, always accompanied by wrong
    view?
5.  Who has eradicated all forms of bhava-taṇhā?
6.  Can the sotāpanna (streamwinner) have vibhava-taṇhā, clinging to
    non-existence?
7.  Can the anāgāmī (non-returner) have clinging to seeing?
8.  Can the anāgāmī have attachment to jhāna?
9.  Is it possible to have attachment when we help someone else?
10. Can attachment to sati be a hindrance to the development of the
    eightfold Path?
11. Attachment to music is akusala. Monks are not allowed to apply
    themselves to music. Should even laypeople give up music in order to
    develop vipassanā?
12. Can attachment be the object of mindfulness?

