Aversion (dosa)
---------------

Dosa, aversion, is another akusala cetasika. When the citta dislikes the
object it experiences there is dosa, aversion. When there is dosa, the
feeling which accompanies the citta is always unpleasant feeling. We do
not like to feel unhappy and we want to suppress our unpleasant feeling.
However, dosa-mūla-citta arises when there are conditions for its
arising. We may try to suppress unpleasant feeling because we cling to
pleasant feeling; we are ignorant of the real cause of unpleasant
feeling and of the disadvantages of akusala.

We should study the factors which condition dosa-mūla-citta. The
scriptures and the commentaries show us many aspects of dosa and if we
study these aspects we will have more understanding of the disadvantages
and the danger of dosa. Right understanding sees the danger of akusala
and conditions kusala. It is more beneficial to have right understanding
of dosa than just trying to suppress it without any understanding of it.

There always seem to be numerous causes for dosa and they invariably
seem to be outside ourselves: other people’s actions or unhappy events
which occur. However, the real cause is within ourselves. Dosa has been
accumulated and it can always find an object. We are attached to
pleasant objects and when we do not experience pleasant objects there is
bound to be dosa. When dosa arises it shows that the attachment which
conditions it must be very strong.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter III, 257) defines dosa
as follows: …It has flying into anger or churlishness as characteristic,
like a smitten snake; spreading of itself or writhing as when poison
takes effect, as function; or, burning that on which it
depends[(119)](#FOOT119) as function, like jungle-fire; offending or
injuring as manifestation, like a foe who has got his chance; having the
grounds of vexation as proximate cause, like urine mixed with poison.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 171) gives a similar definition of
dosa[(120)](#FOOT120).

We read that the characteristic of dosa is flying into anger like a
smitten snake. When a snake has been hit he is likely to become fierce
and attack. Dosa is aggressive, just like a snake which has been hit.
The function of dosa is spreading of itself or writhing as when poison
takes effect. When poison has been taken it affects the whole body and
it causes suffering. Dosa has likewise an ill effect, it is harmful. The
function of dosa is also compared to a jungle-fire which burns that on
which it depends. Dosa is destructive like a jungle-fire which consumes
the forest. The proximate cause of dosa are “grounds for annoyance, like
urine mixed with poison”. Urine mixed with poison is not liked by
anybody, although urine was taken as a medicine in India. It is useful
to study the proximate cause of dosa, the “grounds for annoyance”. Dosa
often arises on account of what others are doing or saying to us or to
someone else. Even a good deed done to someone else can be a reason for
annoyance if we dislike that person. We read in the *Book of Analysis*
(Chapter 17, par960) about nine reasons for dosa:

> Therein what are “nine bases of vexation”? “He has done me harm”, thus
> vexation arises; “He is doing me harm”, thus vexation arises; “He will
> do me harm”, thus vexation arises; “He has done harm, …he is doing
> harm, …he will do harm to one dear and pleasant to me”, thus vexation
> arises; “He has done good, …he is doing good, …he will do good to one
> not dear and not pleasant to me”, thus vexation arises. These are nine
> bases of vexation.

Dosa arises with two types of citta, of which one is “unprompted”
(asaṅkhārika) and one “prompted” (sasaṅkhārika)[(121)](#FOOT121). There
are many degrees of dosa. It may be a slight aversion or it may be
stronger, appearing as moodiness, bad temper, anger or hate. When dosa
is strong one may speak harsh words or throw things about the house. One
may feel desperate and commit suicide, one may hit others and even
commit murder. When we hear about crimes other people have committed
with dosa, we wonder how it could happen. When strong dosa arises it can
lead to the committing of akusala kamma which we may not have thought
ourselves capable of. Strong dosa can even motivate “heinous crimes”
(anantarika kamma) which produce an unhappy rebirth immediately after
the life during which one committed the crime has ended. We read about
five heinous crimes in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Fives, Chapter
13, par9, Festering):

> Monks, five are lost in hell who lie festering, incurable. What five?
>
> (By him) has his mother been deprived of life; his father; an arahat;
> (by him), with evil thought, has the Tathāgata’s blood been drawn; (by
> him) has the Order been embroiled.
>
> Verily, monks, these are the five lost in hell who lie festering,
> incurable.

We should remember that all degrees of dosa are dangerous, even the
lesser degrees. If we do not develop right understanding we accumulate
more and more dosa without realizing it. Therefore, it is helpful to
study the different aspects of dosa.

Dosa can motivate akusala kamma patha (unwholesome courses of action)
through body, speech and mind. The akusala kamma patha through body
which is killing is motivated by dosa. As to stealing, this can be
motivated by lobha or by dosa. It is motivated by dosa when one wants to
harm another person. Three of the four akusala kamma pathas through
speech, namely lying, slandering and idle talk, can be motivated by
lobha or by dosa. They are motivated by dosa when one wants to harm
someone else. The akusala kamma patha which is rude speech is motivated
by dosa. The akusala kamma patha through the mind which is ill-will is
motivated by dosa. This is the intention to hurt or harm someone else.
Akusala kamma brings sorrow both in this life and the next. The person
who has committed akusala kamma may become afraid of the result it will
bring and he has no peace of mind. Dosa is harmful for mind and body.
Because of dosa our appearance becomes ugly: we may become red in the
face, our features become unpleasant and the corners of our mouth droop.
If we remember that it is not considerate to show others an unpleasant
face it can condition patience instead of dosa. There are many ill
effects of dosa. It causes sleeplessness, the loss of friends, the loss
of one’s good name, of prosperity and wealth. And after this life has
ended one may have an unhappy rebirth because of dosa.

We may not have dosa of the intensity to motivate the committing of
akusala kamma patha, but even dosa which is of a lesser degree can
condition unpleasant behaviour and speech. We can easily, before we
realize it, utter harsh speech to someone else. When there is dosa, even
if it is a slight annoyance, there is no loving kindness, no
consideration for other people’s feelings. When, for example, unexpected
visitors arrive at a time we do not want to be disturbed, we may be
annoyed. At such a moment there is mental rigidity, we are unable to
adapt ourselves to a new situation with kindness and hospitality. The
*Book of Analysis* (Chapter 17, par833) gives us a short but very
effective reminder in a section in which pairs of realities are summed
up (Twofold Summary): …Absence of softness and inhospitality.

This statement is meant as a reminder to be aware of realities of daily
life. How true it is that inhospitality goes together with absence of
softness, with mental rigidity. However, although there may be aversion
at first when we are, for example, disturbed by unexpected visitors,
right understanding can change our attitude. We may see the disadvantage
of being inconsiderate to others and of absence of softness, of
gentleness. Then we can receive our guests with kindness and we can see
for ourselves that there is no longer mental rigidity and harshness, but
pliancy of mind.

Dosa can also appear as fear. When there is fear one dislikes the object
which is experienced. Fear is harmful for mind and body. One may have
fear of people, of situations, of sickness, old age and death. So long
as dosa has not been eradicated it will always find an object.

People have different accumulations: some people may have aversion at
certain occasions while others do not. Dosa does not only arise because
of what other people do or don’t do, it can arise on account of any
object experienced through one of the six doors. One may even be cross
with the rain, the sun or the wind. We read in the *Atthasālinī* (II,
Book II, Part II, Summary, Chapter II, 367):

> …“Or when vexation (springs up) groundlessly” means anger without
> reason; for example, someone gets angry saying “it rains too much”,
> “it does not rain”, “the sun shines too much”, “it does not shine”;
> gets angry when the wind blows, when it does not blow, gets angry at
> being unable to sweep away the Bodhi leaves, at being unable to put on
> his robe; he gets angry with the wind, in slipping he gets angry with
> a tree-stump…

The Buddha compares someone who gets angry very easily with an open
sore. An open sore hurts at the slightest touch, it is foul and
unpleasant to look at. We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the
Threes, Chapter III, par25, The open sore):

> …of what sort, monks, is the one whose mind is like an open sore?
>
> Herein a certain person is irritable and turbulent. When anything, no
> matter how trifling, is said to him, he becomes enraged, he gets angry
> and quarrelsome: he resents it and displays anger, hatred and
> sulkiness. Just as, for instance, when a festering sore, if struck by
> a stick or shard, discharges matter all the more, even so, monks, a
> certain person…displays anger, hatred and sulkiness. This one is
> called “He whose mind is like an open sore”…

The Buddha then spoke about the “lightning-minded”, the person who has
realized the four noble Truths but who is not yet arahat, and about the
“diamond-minded”, the arahat. Just as a diamond can cut everything, even
a gem or a rock, even so has the arahat cut off, destroyed, the
“āsavas”[(122)](#FOOT122).

So long as we cling to the pleasant “worldly conditions” (loka-dhammas)
of gain, fame, praise and well-being, we are bound to have aversion when
they change. They change all the time but we forget that they are
impermanent. When we lose possessions, when we do not receive honour,
when we are blamed or when we suffer pain, we have aversion and sadness.
Right understanding of realities, of kamma and vipāka, can help us to be
more even-minded about pleasant and unpleasant things which happen to
us. When we experience unpleasant objects through the senses, it is
caused by akusala kamma, by unwholesome deeds which have been committed
already, and nobody can avoid akusala vipāka when it is the right time
for its arising. When we understand that aversion about akusala vipāka
is not helpful, there can be “wise attention” instead of “unwise
attention” to the objects which are experienced. There may be
intellectual understanding of realities but this understanding cannot
eradicate dosa and the other defilements. Only right understanding
developed in vipassanā can eradicate them.

Dosa can be temporarily eliminated by the development of calm. When one
sees the disadvantages of clinging to sensuous objects and one has
accumulations for the development of calm to the degree of jhāna, one
can be temporarily free from sense-impressions. Rūpāvacara kusala cittas
(of “fine material jhāna”) can produce result in the form of rebirth in
rūpa-brahma planes and arūpāvacara kusala cittas (of immaterial jhāna)
can produce results in the form of rebirth in arūpa-brahma planes.
Although lobha and moha can arise in these planes[(123)](#FOOT123),
there are no conditions for dosa. However, dosa arises again when there
is rebirth in one of the sensuous planes. As we have seen, clinging to
sense objects conditions dosa. Only when the stage of the anāgāmī has
been attained dosa has been eradicated. The anāgāmī does not cling to
sense objects and thus he has no conditions for dosa.

Dosa can eventually be eradicated only if we develop right understanding
of realities. Right understanding sees dosa as it really is: as saṅkhāra
dhamma, conditioned dhamma, non-self. Through mindfulness of dosa its
characteristic can be known. We believe that it is easy to recognize
dosa, but we usually think of the concept “dosa” or “aversion”, and then
its characteristic will not be known. We will still take it for “my
dosa”, instead of realizing that it is only a kind of nāma which arises
because of conditions.

It may happen that we have so much aversion about our aversion and about
the unpleasant feeling which accompanies it, that we believe that we
cannot be mindful of the reality of the present moment. In theory we
know that there can be mindfulness of any reality which appears now, but
what about the practice? When we see the benefit of right understanding
of whatever reality appears, there are conditions for the arising of
mindfulness, even when it seems that we are not “in the mood“ for it.

It seems that we do not have hatred or anger, but this does not mean
that dosa has been eradicated. So long as there is still the latent
tendency of dosa, it can arise any time. We read in the *Middle Length
Sayings* (I, no. 21, The Parable of the Saw) about Videhikā who was calm
so long as there was no opportunity for dosa. It seemed that she had no
dosa at all. She had an excellent reputation, she appeared to be gentle,
meek and calm. Her servant Kāḷiī wanted to test her and she came to work
later every day. Because of this Videhikā lost her temper: she hit Kāḷiī
on her head with the pin used for securing the door bolt. Because of
that she acquired an evil reputation. We read that the Buddha said to
the monks:

> Even so, monks, some monk here is very gentle, very meek, very
> tranquil so long as disagreeable ways of speech do not assail him. But
> when disagreeable ways of speech assail the monk it is then that he is
> to be called gentle, is to be called meek, is to be called tranquil…

The Buddha exhorted the monks to have a “mind of friendliness”, even if
others spoke to them in a disagreeable way, even if low-down thieves
would carve them limb by limb with a double-handled saw.

Those who have eradicated dosa, the anāgāmī and the arahat, never have
anger nor the slightest displeasure, even in circumstances which are
very difficult to bear, even when they have to endure sickness or pain.

We tend to have aversion when we have pain or when we are sick. When an
unpleasant object impinges on the bodysense, body-consciousness
accompanied by painful feeling experiences that object.
Body-consciousness is vipākacitta, it is in this case the result of
akusala kamma. Shortly afterwards in that process of cittas
dosa-mūla-cittas are likely to arise which experience that object with
aversion. It seems almost inevitable that aversion arises after the
body-consciousness which experiences an unpleasant object. In order to
have right understanding of the different phenomena which occur, it is
necessary to develop mindfulness of nāma and rūpa. There are many
different types of nāma and rūpa when we have pain and when we have
aversion about pain, and they can be objects of awareness one at a time.
Right understanding of nāma and rūpa will help us to bear great pains
and to be patient in case of sickness. If we begin to develop right
understanding of realities at this moment we accumulate conditions for
its arising when we are sick or when we are about to die.

### Questions

1.  Is the suppression of unpleasant feeling always done with kusala
    citta?
2.  What are the proximate causes for dosa?
3.  When there are unpleasant “worldly conditions” we are likely to have
    dosa. How can right understanding of kamma and vipāka help us to
    have kusala citta instead of dosa?
4.  Why is there no dosa in the rūpa-brahma planes and in the
    arūpa-brahma planes?
5.  Why can dosa not be eradicated without developing right
    understanding of nāma and rūpa? Why can it not be eradicated by just
    developing loving kindness?
6.  When we suffer from sickness and when we are about to die what is
    the most beneficial thing that can be done in order not to be
    overcome by dosa? What should be done if dosa arises in such
    circumstances?

