Volition in the Cycle of Birth and Death
----------------------------------------

Cetanā, volition, is a cetasika which arises with every citta, as we
have seen. Seeing, hearing or thinking which arise now are accompanied
by cetanā. Every type of cetanā performs the function of coordinating
the different tasks of the accompanying dhammas, no matter whether the
citta is kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta.

Kusala cetanā or akusala cetanā can be of the intensity of motivating wholesome or unwholesome deeds through body, speech or mind which produce their appropriate results. In that case, kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā are actually asynchronous kamma or kamma working from a different time (nāṇakkhaṇika kamma).

Kusala kamma and akusala kamma can produce results in the form of
rebirth-consciousness in different planes of existence or in the form of
vipākacittas which arise in the course of one’s life, such as seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting or the experience of tangibles through the
body-sense. We experience pleasant objects and unpleasant objects
through the senses and it depends on kamma whether we have a pleasant
experience or an unpleasant experience through these senses.

Cetanā or kamma which motivates a good deed or a bad deed falls away
immediately together with the citta, but since each citta is succeeded
by the next one, kamma is accumulated and thus it can produce its result
later on, even in a next life. How do we know whether there is a next
life? We will understand more about the next life if we understand our
life right now. By the term ’human life’ in conventional language we
mean the duration of time we are in this human plane of existence.
However, in order to know the truth we should know *realities*, not
merely conventional terms. In fact, our life consists of innumerable
moments of citta which arise and fall away, succeeding one another.
There is birth and death of citta at each moment and thus life lasts as
long as one moment of citta. When there is citta which sees, there is
only that citta, there cannot be any other citta at the same time. At
that moment our life is seeing. Seeing does not last, it falls away
again. When there is citta which hears there is only that citta and our
life is hearing. This citta also falls away and is succeeded by the next
one. In this life we see and hear pleasant and unpleasant objects, we
have pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling or indifferent feeling. We are
full of attachment, aversion and ignorance. Sometimes we perform
wholesome deeds: we are generous, we abstain from killing and we develop
right understanding. Our life actually consists of one moment of citta
which experiences an object. The citta of a moment ago has fallen away
completely, but right now another citta has arisen and this falls away
again. When we understand that there are conditions for each citta to be
succeeded by the next one, we will also understand that the last citta
of this life, the dying-consciousness, will be succeeded by a next citta
which is the rebirth-consciousness of the next life. So long as we are
in the cycle of birth and death there are conditions for citta to arise
and to be succeeded by a next one.

Rebirth-consciousness, the first citta of life, and its accompanying
cetasikas are the mental result of kamma. In the planes where there are
nāma and rūpa kamma also produces rūpas from the first moment of life.
Also throughout life there are rūpas produced by kamma such as eyesense,
earsense and the other senses which are the means for vipākacittas to
experience pleasant or unpleasant objects. The rūpas produced by kamma
are the physical results of kamma. The different rūpas of our body are
not only produced by kamma, but also by citta, by temperature and by
nutrition. Thus, there are four factors which each produce different
rūpas of our body.

In this life we perform good deeds and bad deeds; we do not know which
deed will produce the next rebirth-consciousness. Also a deed which was
performed in a past life is capable of producing the next
rebirth-consciousness. Since we are now in the human plane of existence,
it was kusala kamma which produced the first citta of our life; birth in
the human plane is a happy rebirth. If the kamma which will produce the
rebirth-consciousness of the next life is akusala kamma, there will be
an unhappy rebirth, and if it is kusala kamma there will be a happy
rebirth. Nobody can choose his own rebirth, the rebirth-consciousness is
a conditioned dhamma, it is saṅkhāra dhamma. This life consists of
citta, cetasika and rūpa which are conditioned dhammas. Also in a next
life there are bound to be citta, cetasika and rūpa, conditioned
dhammas. There will be kusala cittas, akusala cittas, vipākacittas and
kiriyacittas. If we are not born in an unhappy plane there can be again
the development of right understanding.

Since kusala kamma and akusala kamma are capable of producing
rebirth-consciousness, they are a link in the *’Dependant Origination’*
(Paṭiccasamuppāda, the conditional origination of phenomena). The
doctrine of the ’Dependant Origination’ explains the conditions for the
continuation of the cycle of birth and death by way of twelve links,
starting from *ignorance* (avijjā). Ignorance is mentioned as the first
link. It is because of not knowing realities as they are, that we have
to be born and that we have to suffer old age, sickness and death. The
eradication of ignorance is the end of the cycle and thus the end of
dukkha.

Ignorance, the first link, conditions *saṅkhāra*, the second link.
Saṅkhāra are the *kusala cetanās and akusala cetanās*, the *kammas*,
which are capable of producing vipāka. Saṅkhāra conditions *viññāṇa*
(consciousness). Viññāṇa, the third link, is vipākacitta which can be
rebirth-consciousness or vipākacitta arising throughout life such as
seeing or hearing. The Dependant Origination represents the conditions
for our present life and our life in the future, thus, the conditions
for the continuation of the cycle of birth and death.

*Saṅkhāra*, the second link in the Dependant Origination, is *cetanā* in
its function of kamma which produces vipāka, so that the cycle of birth
and death continues[(40)](#FOOT40). Under this aspect cetanā is also
called *abhisaṅkhāra.* The prefix ’abhi’ is sometimes used in the sense
of preponderance. Cetanā which is kusala kamma or akusala kamma has
preponderance in the conditioning of rebirth. Only cetanā which
accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta can be ’abhisaṅkhāra’. Cetanā
which accompanies vipākacitta and kiriyacitta cannot be
abhisaṅkhāra.[(41)](#FOOT41)

All abhisaṅkhāras or “kamma-formations” are a link in the Dependent
Origination, they are conditioned by ignorance. Kusala kamma is still
conditioned by ignorance, although at the moment of kusala citta there
is no ignorance accompanying the citta. So long as there is ignorance we
perform kamma which can produce vipāka; we will be reborn and thus the
cycle continues. We read in the *Visuddhimagga* (XVII, 119) that the
ignorant man is like a blind person:

``` 
 As one born blind, who gropes along  
 Without assistance from a guide,     
 Chooses a road that may be right     
 At one time, at another wrong,       
 So while this foolish man pursues    
 The round of births without a guide, 
 Now to do merit he may choose        
 And now demerit in such plight.      
 But when the Dhamma he comes to know 
 And penetrates the Truths beside,    
 Then ignorance is put to flight      
 At last, and he in peace may go.
 
 ```  

While we study the different aspects of cetanā we can see that cetanā is
different as it arises with different cittas. Cetanā which accompanies
kusala citta or akusala citta “wills” kusala or akusala and it is
capable of producing vipāka; it is, except in the case of cetanā which
accompanies magga-citta, abhisaṅkhāra or kamma-formation. The cetanās
which accompany rūpāvacara citta and arūpāvacara citta can produce
rebirth in higher planes of existence, in rūpa-brahma planes and
arūpa-brahma planes, they are a link in the Dependant Origination.
Cetanā which accompanies vipākacitta is vipāka, it is produced by
akusala kamma or kusala kamma. This type of cetanā has only the function
of coordinating the other dhammas it accompanies. The cetanā which
accompanies kiriyacitta is not kusala or akusala, nor is it vipāka; it
is of the jāti which is kiriya, inoperative. This type of cetanā has
only the function of coordinating.

Cetanā which accompanies lokuttara citta is not a link in the Dependant
Origination. The lokuttara citta which is ’magga-citta’
(path-consciousness) produces vipāka (the phala-citta or
fruit-consciousness) immediately; the phala-citta succeeds the
magga-citta. Since the magga-citta eradicates defilements it will free
one from the cycle of birth and death. The arahat is freed from rebirth.
He does not perform kamma which can produce vipāka. The cetanā which
accompanies the kiriyacittas of the arahat and the ahetuka kiriyacitta
which is the hasituppāda-citta (smile-producing consciousness) of the
arahat, is not abhisaṅkhāra, it is not a link in the Dependant
Origination[(42)](#FOOT42).

As we have seen, cetanā which is kusala kamma or akusala kamma can
produce vipāka. Time and again there are pleasant or unpleasant
experiences through the senses and these are vipākacittas: we see, hear,
smell, taste or experience through the bodysense pleasant or unpleasant
objects. We may know in theory that vipākacittas are cittas which are
result, different from kusala cittas and akusala cittas, but theoretical
knowledge is not enough. We should learn to distinguish different types
of citta when they appear. Each situation in life consists of many
different moments which arise because of different types of conditions.
For example, when we hurt ourselves because of an accident, there is an
unpleasant experience through the bodysense which is vipāka, but the
moments of vipāka fall away immediately and very shortly afterwards
aversion is bound to arise. It is difficult to distinguish the moment of
vipāka from the moment of akusala citta; cittas succeed one another very
rapidly. When we think: ’This is vipāka’, the moments of vipāka have
fallen away already, and the cittas which think are either kusala or
akusala. There are different types of conditions for the cittas which
arise. The akusala cittas and kusala cittas are conditioned by the
accumulated tendencies to kusala and akusala, whereas the experience of
a pleasant or unpleasant object through one of the senses such as seeing
or hearing is vipāka, which is conditioned by kamma.

Cetanā is *saṅkhāra dhamma*, a conditioned dhamma. It is conditioned by
the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies. The word saṅkhāra has
different meanings, depending on the context in which it is used. The
word “saṅkhāra” used in the context of the Dependant Origination, means
“kamma-formation”. Cetanā as a link in the Dependant Origination is
kamma-formation, kamma which is capable of producing vipāka so that the
cycle of birth and death continues.

At this moment we are in the cycle of birth and death and we cling to
life, we want to go on living. We think that life is desirable because
we do not know what life really is: only nāma and rūpa which do not
stay. We cling to the self, we want to be liked and admired by others,
we want to be successful in our work. However, we have many frustrations
in life; when we do not get what we want we are disappointed. So long as
there are defilements there is no end to the cycle of birth and death,
but there can be an end to the cycle if we begin to know this moment of
seeing, visible object, hearing, sound or thinking as it is, as only
conditioned realities which do not stay. We are forgetful of realities
very often, but reminders to be aware are right at hand. We can be
reminded to be aware when we notice our own as well as other people’s
clinging to all objects and the sorrow caused by clinging.

In the *Kindred Sayings* (III, First Fifty, Chapter 3, par23,
Understanding) we read that the five khandhas, that is all conditioned
realities which appear in our life, have to be understood as they are.
We read that the Buddha, while he was at Sāvatthī, said to the monks:

> Monks, I will show you things that are to be understood, likewise
> understanding. Do you listen to it.
>
> And what, monks, are the things to be understood? Body, monks, is a
> thing to be understood; feeling is a thing to be understood;
> perception, the activities (saṅkhārakkhandha) and consciousness also.
> These, monks, are ’the things that are to be understood.’
>
> And what, monks, is ’understanding?’
>
> The destruction of lust, the destruction of hatred, the destruction of
> illusion; that, monks, is called ’understanding’.
>
> If there is awareness and understanding right now of seeing, hearing
> or any other reality which appears, there will eventually be an end to
> rebirth.

### Questions

1.  How can we know that there is a next life?
2.  Which kinds of cetanā are a link in the Dependant Origination?
3.  Why is cetanā which accompanies magga-citta not kamma-formation?
4.  Kusala kamma is capable of producing vipāka and thus it is a link in
    the Dependant Origination. Why does it still make sense to perform
    kusala kamma?