# Envy, Stinginess, Regret

Introduction
------------

There are three akusala dhammas which can arise only with
dosa-mūla-citta, citta rooted in aversion, namely: *envy* (issā),
*stinginess* (macchariya) and *regret* (kukkucca). Aversion tends to
arise often, both in sense-door processes and in mind-door processes,
because we have accumulated so much aversion. Dosa-mūla-citta is always
accompanied by unpleasant feeling. We may notice that we have aversion
and unpleasant feeling, but we should also come to know other
defilements which can arise with dosa-mūla-citta, namely: envy,
stinginess and regret. These akusala cetasikas can, one at a time,
accompany dosa-mūla-citta. This does not mean that dosa-mūla-citta is
always accompanied by one of these three akusala cetasikas. Sometimes
dosa-mūla-citta is accompanied by one of these three and sometimes it is
not accompanied by any of them. I shall now deal with these three
akusala cetasikas.

Envy (issā}
----------------

As regards envy or jealousy, this can arise when someone else receives a
pleasant object. At such a moment we may wonder why he receives a
pleasant object and why we don’t. Envy is always accompanied by
unpleasant feeling, because it can only arise with dosa-mūla-citta, with
the citta which dislikes the object which is experienced. We dislike
unpleasant feeling, but merely disliking it does not help us to have
kusala citta instead of akusala citta. We should know the different
types of defilements which can arise with akusala citta. It is useful to
study their characteristics, functions, manifestations and proximate
causes. When we see how ugly defilements are and when we understand
their danger, we are reminded to develop satipaṭṭhāna which is the only
way to eradicate them. There is no other way.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter III, 257) gives the
following definition of envy: …It has the characteristic of envying, of
not enduring the prosperity of others, the function of taking no delight
in such prosperity, the manifestation of turning one’s face from such
prosperity, the proximate cause being such prosperity; and it should be
regarded as a fetter.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 172) gives a similar
definition[(124)](#FOOT124).

The proximate cause of envy is someone else’s prosperity. When there is
jealousy one cannot stand it that others receive pleasant objects. At
that moment there cannot be “sympathetic joy” (muditā). We may be
jealous when someone else receives a gift, when he receives honour or
praise because of his good qualities or his wisdom. When there is
jealousy we do not want someone else to be happy and we may even wish
that he will lose the pleasant objects or the good qualities he
possesses.

Envy is dangerous. When it is strong it can motivate akusala kamma patha
(unwholesome course of action) and this is capable of producing an
unhappy rebirth. One may, because of jealousy, even kill someone else.

We all have accumulated jealousy and thus it is bound to arise. It is
useful to notice the moments of jealousy, also when it is of a slight
degree. We may be jealous when someone else is praised. We want to be
praised ourselves and we do not want to be overlooked, we find ourselves
important. In reality there is no self, only nāma and rūpa which arise
because of their own conditions. The sotāpanna has right understanding
of realities, he knows that there is no person who can receive or
possess pleasant objects. He realizes that all experiences are only
conditioned realities which do not stay and do not belong to a self. He
has no more conditions for jealousy, he has eradicated it.

When we see the disadvantages of envy we will cultivate conditions for
having it less often. Sympathetic joy, muditā, is the opposite of envy.
Muditā is sympathetic joy in someone else’s prosperity and happiness.
The Buddha taught us different ways of developing wholesomeness and the
development of sympathetic joy is one of them. At first it may be
difficult to rejoice in other people’s happiness, but when we appreciate
the value of sympathetic joy there are conditions for its arising. It
can gradually become our nature to rejoice in other people’s happiness.
When there is sympathetic joy, the citta is kusala citta. Each kusala
citta is accompanied by non-attachment, alobha, non-hate, adosa, and it
may be accompanied by right understanding or without it. Envy cannot be
eradicated by sympathetic joy, even if we have many moments of it. Only
right understanding of nāma and rūpa can eventually eradicate envy.

Stinginess (macchariya)
-----------------------

Stinginess or avarice, macchariya, is another akusala cetasika which can
arise with dosa-mūla-citta. It does not arise with every
dosa-mūla-citta, but when it arises it accompanies dosa-mūla-citta. When
there is stinginess there is also aversion towards the object which is
experienced at that moment and the feeling is unpleasant feeling.
Stinginess cannot arise with lobha-mūla-citta or with moha-mūla-citta.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter II, 257) gives the
following definition of avarice (meanness):

It has, as characteristic, the concealing of one’s property, either
attained or about to be attained; the not enduring the sharing of one’s
property in common with others, as function; the shrinking from such
sharing or niggardliness or sour feeling as manifestation; one’s own
property as proximate cause; and it should be regarded as mental
ugliness.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 173) gives a similar definition.

When there is stinginess there is a cramped state of mind, one cannot
stretch out one’s hand in order to give a gift. The proximate cause of
avarice is one’s own property, whereas, as we have seen, the proximate
cause of envy is someone else’s prosperity. When there is avarice one is
unable to share what one has (or will acquire) with someone else.

There are five kinds of objects on account of which stinginess can
arise. We read in the *Dhammasangaṇi* (par1122) in its definition of the
fetter of meanness:

> The five meannesses, (to wit) meanness as regards dwelling, families,
> gifts, reputation, dhamma—all this sort of meanness, grudging, mean
> spirit, avarice and ignobleness, niggardliness and want of generosity
> of heart—this is called the fetter of meanness.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 376), in its
explanation of the words of the *Dhammasangaṇi*, states that the mean
person also hinders someone else from giving. Stinginess can motivate
one to try to persuade someone else, for example one’s husband or wife,
to give less or not to give at all. We read in the *Atthasālinī* :

 ```                       
 …and this also has been said,        
 Malicious, miserly, ignoble, wrong…  
 Such men hinder the feeding of the poor…                                 
 ```                                  


> A “niggardly” person seeing mendicants causes his mind to shrink as by
> sourness. His state is “niggardliness”. Another way (of definition):-
> “niggardliness is a “spoon-feeding”. For when the pot is full to the
> brim, one takes food from it by a spoon with the edge bent on all
> sides; it is not possible to get a spoonful; so is the mind of a mean
> person bent in. When it is bent in, the body also is bent in, recedes,
> is not diffused—thus stinginess is said to be niggardliness.
>
> “Lack of generosity of heart” is the state of a mind which is shut and
> gripped, so that it is not stretched out in the mode of making gifts,
> etc., in doing service to others. But because the mean person wishes
> not to give to others what belongs to himself, and wishes to take what
> belongs to others, therefore this meanness should be understood to
> have the characteristic of hiding or seizing one’s own property,
> occurring thus: “May it be for me and not for another”…

As regards the five kinds of objects one can be stingy
about[(125)](#FOOT125), the *Atthasālinī* (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter
II, 373-375) explains about these five kinds and mentions that there is
no stinginess if one does not want to share these things with a person
who will use them in the wrong way or with a bhikkhu who will disgrace
the Sangha.

As regards stinginess about dwelling, the “dwelling” can be a monastery,
a single room or any place where one stays, no matter whether it is big
or small. We can be stingy with regard to any place where we are
comfortable, such as a corner in a room or a seat.

As regards stinginess about “family”, this can be a family of servitors
to a monastery or one’s relatives. A bhikkhu who is stingy does not want
another bhikkhu to approach a family he usually visits, because he does
not want to share with someone else the goods he receives. We may be
stingy not only with regard to things, but also with regard to words of
praise. For example, when we, together with others, have accomplished a
work of charity, we may only want to be praised ourselves; we may not
want to share honour and praise with others, although they deserve to be
praised as well. We should scrutinize ourselves as to this form of
stinginess; we should find out whether it is easy for us to praise
others. If we understand that praising someone’s virtues is an act of
generosity, we will more often remember to do this when the opportunity
arises. When we praise someone else there is no room for stinginess.
There are many different ways of kusala and in our daily life there are
opportunities right at hand for one kind of kusala or other, no matter
whether we are alone or with other people.

Someone may be stingy as to Dhamma. He may not want to share Dhamma with
others because he is afraid that they will acquire the same amount of
knowledge as he himself or even more. The sotāpanna who has realized the
four noble Truths, has eradicated all forms of stinginess. He wishes
everyone to know and realize the Dhamma he has realized himself. Those
who are non-ariyans may have stinginess as to Dhamma. However, there may
be good reasons for not teaching Dhamma. One should not teach Dhamma to
someone who is bound to abuse the Dhamma and to interpret it wrongly, or
to someone who will erroneously take himself for an arahat because of
his knowledge. There is no stinginess if one does not teach Dhamma to
such persons, because one acts then out of consideration for the Dhamma
or out of consideration for people.

In the ultimate sense there are no things we can possess, there are only
nāma and rūpa. If we remember this we can see that it is foolish to
think that realities which arise and fall away belong to us and that we
can keep them. Why are we stingy about what does not belong to us? We
cannot take our possessions, our money with us when we die. Human life
is so short and we waste many opportunities for kusala because of our
stinginess. In the absolute sense there is no self, no person who can
possess anything. Our life consists of nāma and rūpa which arise and
fall away. Life is actually one moment of experiencing an object; this
moment falls away and is succeeded by a next moment which is different
again. We cannot possess visible object or hardness. They are only rūpas
which do not stay and do not belong to us. When understanding has been
developed more there will be less stinginess. The sotāpanna who sees
nāma and rūpa as they are, as impermanent and not self, has no more
conditions for stinginess.

We should find out why we are stingy. We do not want to give things away
because we fear that our possessions will decrease, but then we are
likely to suffer from the very things we are afraid of. The experience
of objects through the senses is vipāka, the result of kamma. We read in
the *Kindred Sayings* (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Chapter I, The Devas, Part 4,
par2, Avarice) that devas of the Satullapa group came to see the Buddha
and spoke to him about avarice and generosity. One among them said:


                                      
 ```                      
 …That which the miser dreads, and hence gives not,
 To him not giving just that danger it is:
 Hunger and thirst---for this the thing he dreads---
 Just this the doom that does befall the fool
 In this and also in some other world.
 Hence should he avarice suppress, and make            
 Offerings of charity, mastering the taint.
 Sure platform in some other future world 
 Rewards of virtue on good beings wait. 
 
 ```                                  


The five kinds of avarice can motivate akusala kamma which is capable of
producing an unhappy rebirth or akusala vipāka in the course of one’s
life: one may have to endure hardship, poverty, disease and dishonour.
The *Atthasālinī*, in the section about meanness (375) speaks about the
unpleasant results produced by the five kinds of stinginess and states
about the results of stinginess with regard to praise and to Dhamma:

> …one who extols his own praises and not those of others; who mentions
> this and that fault of anyone saying, “What praise does he deserve?”
> and does not impart any doctrine of learning to him, becomes ugly, or
> has a mouth dripping with saliva…

The person who has a mouth dripping with saliva cannot speak in a
pleasant way and is ugly to look at, therefore people do not like to
listen to him. Further on the *Atthasālinī* states that the result of
stinginess with regard to praise can also be that one is born without
beauty or reputation. Owing to stinginess with regard to Dhamma one may
also be reborn in one of the hell planes, the “hot-ash hell”.

So long as one has not become a sotāpanna there are opportunities for
the arising of stinginess. Some people have stinginess more often than
others, or someone may have stinginess as to certain objects, such as
money, but not as to other objects, such as praise or Dhamma; it all
depends on people’s accumulations. But even if someone is very stingy by
nature, his attitude can be changed. Through right understanding one can
learn to develop generosity.

We read in the commentary to the *Sudhābhojana-Jātaka* (Jātakas, Book V,
no. 535) about a monk in the Buddha’s time who practised the utmost
generosity. He gave away his food and even if he received something to
drink which was merely sufficient to fill the hollow of his hand, he
would, free from greed, still give it away. But formerly he used to be
so stingy that “he would not give so much as a drop of oil on the tip of
a blade of grass”. The Buddha spoke about one of this monk’s former
lives when he was the miser Kosiya and this is the story of the
“Sudhābhojana Jātaka”.

Kosiya did not keep up the tradition of almsgiving of his ancestors and
lived as a miser. One day he had craving for rice-porridge. When his
wife suggested that she would cook rice-porridge not only for him but
also for all the inhabitants of Vārānasi, he felt “just as if he had
been struck on the head with a stick”. As we have read in the definition
of avarice in the *Atthasālinī*, its manifestation is “the shrinking
from such sharing, or niggardliness or sour feeling…” When there is
avarice there is always unpleasant feeling, there cannot be any
happiness.

We then read in the Jātaka that Kosiya’s wife subsequently offered to
cook for a single street, for the attendants in his house, for the
family, for the two of them, but he turned down all her offers. He
wanted to cook porridge only for himself, in the forest, so that nobody
else could see it. We should remember that the characteristic of
stinginess is the concealing of one’s property. One wants to hide it
because one does not want to share it.

We then read in the Jātaka that the Bodhisatta who was at that time the
god Sakka wanted to convert him and came to him with four attendants
disguised as brahmins. One by one they approached the miser and begged
for some of his porridge. Sakka spoke the following stanza, praising
generosity (387):


                                      
 ```                       
 From little one should little give,  
 from moderate means likewise,        
 From much give much: of giving nought 
 no question can arise.             
 This then I tell thee, Kosiya, give  
 alms of that is thine:               
 Eat not alone, no bliss is his that  
 by himself shall dine,               
 By charity thou mayst ascend the noble 
 path divine.   
 
 ```                                  


Kosiya reluctantly offered some porridge to them. Then one of the
brahmins changed himself into a dog. The dog made water and a drop of it
fell on Kosiya’s hand. Kosiya went to the river to wash and then the dog
made water in Kosiya’s cooking pot. When Kosiya threatened him he
changed into a “blood horse” and pursued Kosiya. Then Sakka and his
attendants stood in the air and Sakka preached to Kosiya out of
compassion and warned him of an unhappy rebirth. Kosiya came to
understand the danger of stinginess. He gave away all his possessions
and became an ascetic.

At the end of the Jātaka the Buddha said: “Not now only, monks, but of
old also I converted this niggardly fellow who was a confirmed miser”.

Right understanding sees the danger of akusala and it conditions the
development of kusala. When we still cling so much to our possessions
and are stingy with regard to them it will be all the more difficult to
become detached from the self. We should develop generosity in giving
away useful things and also in praising those who deserve praise. We
should see the value of all kinds of kusala. When the citta is kusala
citta there is no stinginess, but stinginess can only be eradicated by
the development of right understanding of any reality which appears.

Regret (kukkucca)
----------------------

*Regret* or *worry,* kukkucca, is another akusala cetasika which can
arise with dosa-mūla-citta. It does not arise with every
dosa-mūla-citta, but when it arises, it arises only with
dosa-mūla-citta. It cannot arise with lobha-mūla-citta or with
moha-mūla-citta. When there is regret there is also aversion towards the
object which is experienced at that moment. Therefore, the feeling which
accompanies kukkucca is always unpleasant feeling.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book II, Part IX, Chapter III, 258) gives the
following definition of kukkucca:

> …It has repentance as characteristic, sorrow at deeds of commission
> and omission as function, regret as manifestation, deeds of commission
> and omission as proximate cause, and it should be regarded as a state
> of bondage.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 174) gives a similar definition.

The characteristic of kukkucca is repentance. Repentance is generally
considered a virtue, but the reality of kukkucca is not wholesome, it
arises with dosa-mūla-citta. Kukkucca which “regrets” the commission of
evil and the omission of kusala is different from wholesome thinking
about the disadvantages of akusala and the value of kusala. The
conventional term “worry” which is also used as translation of kukkucca
may not be clear either. When we say that we worry, it may not be the
reality of kukkucca but it may be thinking with aversion about an
unpleasant object without there being kukkucca. For example, we may
worry about the way how to solve a problem in the future; this kind of
worry is not the reality of kukkucca.

If we take note of the proximate cause of kukkucca we will better
understand what kukkucca is. The proximate cause of kukkucca is akusala
kamma through body, speech and mind which has been committed and also
kusala kamma through body, speech and mind which has been omitted. We
read in the *Dhammasangaṇi* (par1304 and 1305):

> Which are the states that conduce to remorse?:
>
> Misconduct in act, word and thought. Besides, all bad states conduce
> to remorse.
>
> Which are the states that do not conduce to remorse?
>
> Good conduct in act, word and thought. Besides, no good states
> (absence of good states) conduce to remorse.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 389, 390) explains
this passage of the *Dhammasangaṇi*:

In the exposition of the couplet of what “conduces to remorse”
(*Dhammasangaṇi*, par1304), “remorse” arises from what has been done and
what has been left undone. Acts of misconduct burn from commission, acts
of good conduct burn from omission. Thus a person feels remorse
(literally: burns) at the thought, “I have misconducted myself”, “I have
left undone the right act”; “I have spoken amiss”, …I have left undone
the right thoughts”. Similarly with what does not “conduce to remorse”.
Thus a person doing good does not feel remorse over acts of commission
or omission.

When we have slandered or spoken harsh words there may be remorse about
it afterwards. There can also be remorse about our neglectfulness of
kusala, we often waste opportunities for kusala. We may be stingy when
there is an opportunity for giving or for praising someone who deserves
praise. Or we are neglectful as to the development of right
understanding of realities. As a consequence of our omission of kusala
regret may arise.

We read in the *Middle Length Sayings* (III, 129, Discourse on Fools and
the Wise) about the anguishes which may be experienced by a fool who has
done wrong deeds through body, speech and mind. He experiences anguish
because other people talk about his akusala, and thus he acquires a bad
name. He fears punishment for his evil deeds and therefore he
experiences anguish. Moreover, he has remorse because of his evil deeds
and his neglectfulness as to kusala. We read:

And again, monks, while a fool is on a chair or bed or lying on the
ground, at such a time those evil deeds that he has formerly wrongly
done by body, speech and thought rest on him, lie on him, settle on him.
Monks, as at eventide the shadows of the great mountain peaks rest, lie
and settle on earth, so, monks, do these evil deeds that the fool has
formerly wrongly done by body, speech and thought rest, lie and settle
on him as he is on a chair or bed or lying on the ground. Thereupon,
monks, it occurs thus to the fool: ”Indeed what is lovely has not been
done by me, what is skilled has not been done, no refuge against fearful
(consequences) has been made, evil has been done, cruelty has been done,
violence has been done. Insofar as there is a bourn for those who have
not done what is lovely, have not done what is skilled, have not made a
refuge against fearful (consequences), who have done evil, cruelty and
violence, to that bourn I am going hereafter”. He grieves, mourns,
laments, beats his breast, wails and falls into disillusionment…

The committing of akusala kamma and the omitting of kusala kamma is a
condition for remorse and because of this remorse one is unhappy, one
does not have peace of mind. Akusala kamma can produce an unhappy
rebirth and also unpleasant experiences through the senses in the course
of life.

Regret is one of the “hindrances” (nīvaraṇas) and as such it forms a
pair with restlessness, uddhacca. The “hindrances” are akusala cetasikas
which hinder the performing of kusala. When regret arises there cannot
be kusala at that moment.

We read in the definition of regret that it should be regarded as a
state of bondage. The citta with regret is not free, it is enslaved. At
such a moment there is no peacefulness, no happiness.

If one has not studied the Dhamma and if one does not know about the
different types of citta which arise there are less conditions for the
cultivation of kusala. If kusala is not developed there are more akusala
cittas and thus also more opportunities for the arising of remorse.

The monk who has to observe the rules of the Vinaya may have worry with
regard to his observance of these rules. He may have scruples and he may
even wrongly assume that he transgresses a rule or that he observes a
rule. Worry and doubt may arise because of this. We read in the
*Dhammasangaṇi* (Chapter IX, par1161):

> What is worry (kukkucca)?
>
> Consciousness of what is lawful in something that is unlawful;
> consciousness of what is unlawful in something that is
> lawful[(126)](#FOOT126) ; consciousness of what is immoral in
> something that is moral; consciousness of what is moral in something
> that is immoral—all this sort of worry, fidgeting, overscrupulousness,
> remorse of conscience, mental scarifying- this is what is called
> worry.

It is hard to eradicate regret. Even the sotāpanna may still have
regret, although he has no conditions for regret on account of akusala
kamma which is of the intensity to produce an unhappy rebirth; he has
eradicated the tendencies to such evil deeds. The sotāpanna still has
lobha-mūla-citta, dosa-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta. He does not have
dosa-mūla-citta with envy or stinginess, but dosa-mūla-citta still
arises, and sometimes it may be accompanied by regret. He may speak
harshly, or he may have laziness as to the performing of kusala, and on
account of this regret can arise. The sotāpanna is bound to have regret
less often than those who are non-ariyans. When one has not attained
enlightenment one may be often inclined to brood over the past. The
sotāpanna has developed the four “Applications of Mindfulness”, and thus
he has less conditions than the non-ariyan to worry about the past. When
regret arises he realizes that it is only a conditioned dhamma, saṅkhāra
dhamma, and he does not take it for self.

We still consider regret as “my regret”. We regret our akusala and our
lack of mindfulness. If we realize that thinking with worry is not
helpful it may be a condition to cultivate kusala. When there is
forgetfulness of realities we should remember that it is a conditioned
reality, not self. We should know the characteristics of akusala dhammas
which arise as not self. Then there will be less regret.

According to the *Visuddhimagga* (XXII, 71) the anāgāmī has eradicated
regret completely[(127)](#FOOT127). For him dosa-mūla-citta does not
arise anymore and thus regret cannot arise either.

We should not only know the characteristic of dosa, but also the
characteristics of other akusala cetasikas which can arise with
dosa-mūla-citta: envy, stinginess and regret. As we have seen,
dosa-mūla-citta can be accompanied by only one of these three akusala
cetasikas at a time; they cannot arise simultaneously. They may or may
not arise when dosa-mūla-citta arises. Sometimes there is
dosa-mūla-citta without any of these three akusala cetasikas, sometimes
there is dosa-mūla-citta accompanied by one of these three. We will come
to know the characteristics of the different defilements more clearly by
being mindful of them.

### Questions

1.  Why can envy arise only with dosa-mūla-citta?
2.  Why is it helpful to cultivate the wholesome quality of sympathetic
    joy (muditā)?
3.  Who has eradicated envy?
4.  Can suffering from hunger and thirst be a result of stinginess?
5.  Can those who are very stingy by nature learn to become less stingy?
    In what way?
6.  Who has eradicated stinginess?
7.  What is the proximate cause of regret?
8.  In what way can akusala kamma cause sorrow both in this world and
    the next?
9.  Who has eradicated regret completely?

