Feeling (vedanā)
----------------

Feeling, in Pāli vedanā, is another cetasika among the seven
’universals’. Feeling accompanies every citta, there is no moment
without feeling.

We may think that we all know what feeling is and we believe that it is
easy to recognize pleasant feeling and unpleasant feeling. However, do
we really know the *characteristic of feeling* when it appears or do we
merely think of a concept of feeling? Throughout our life we have seen
ourselves as a ’whole’ of mind and body; also when we consider our
feelings we think of this ’whole’ which we take for ’self’. When someone
asks us: ’How do you feel?’ and we answer, for example, ’I am happy’, we
do not know the characteristic of happy feeling, which is a mental
phenomenon, a nāma; we cling to the ’whole’ of mind and body. Thus we
only know concepts, not realities.

Is there feeling now? We think that we can recognize pleasant feeling or
unpleasant feeling, but are we not mixing up feeling with bodily
phenomena? Feeling is nāma, quite different from rūpa. So long as we do
not distinguish nāma from rūpa we cannot know the characteristic of
feeling as it is.

When we study the Abhidhamma we learn that ’vedanā’ is not the same as
what we mean by feeling in conventional language. Feeling is nāma, it
experiences something. Feeling never arises alone; it accompanies citta
and other cetasikas and it is conditioned by them. Thus, feeling is a
conditioned nāma. Citta does not feel, it cognizes the object and vedanā
feels.

Feeling accompanies all cittas of the four jātis: akusala citta, kusala
citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. Feeling is of the same jāti as the
citta it accompanies. The feeling which accompanies, for example,
akusala citta is also akusala and entirely different from the feeling
which accompanies vipākacitta. Since there are many different types of
citta there is a great variety of feeling. Although there are many kinds
of feeling, they have one characteristic in common: they all are the
paramattha dhamma, non-self, which feels.

All feelings have the function of *experiencing the taste, the flavour
of an object* (*Atthasālinī*, I, Part IV, Chapter I, 109). The
*Atthasālinī* uses a simile in order to illustrate that feeling
experiences the taste of an object and that citta and the other
cetasikas which arise together with feeling experience the taste only
partially. A cook who has prepared a meal for the king merely tests the
food and then offers it to the king who enjoys the taste of it:

> …and the king, being lord, expert, and master, eats whatever he likes,
> even so the mere testing of the food by the cook is like the partial
> enjoyment of the object by the remaining dhammas (the citta and the
> other cetasikas), and as the cook tests a portion of the food, so the
> remaining dhammas enjoy a portion of the object, and as the king,
> being lord, expert and master, eats the meal according to his
> pleasure, so feeling, being lord, expert and master, enjoys the taste
> of the object, and therefore it is said that enjoyment or experience
> is its function.

Thus, all feelings have in common that they experience the ’taste’ of an
object. Citta and the other accompanying cetasikas also experience the
object, but feeling experiences it in its own characteristic way.

Feelings are manifold and they can be classified in different ways. When
they are classified as *three feelings*, they are:

-   pleasant feeling (sukha)
-   unpleasant feeling (dukkha)
-   indifferent (or neutral) feeling (adukkhamasukha: neither painful nor pleasant)

There is no moment without feeling. When there is not pleasant feeling
or unpleasant feeling, there is indifferent feeling. It is difficult to
know what indifferent feeling is. So long as we cannot distinguish nāma
from rūpa we cannot know precisely the characteristic of feeling and
thus we cannot know indifferent feeling either. When mental feelings and
bodily feelings are taken into account, feelings can be classified as
*fivefold:*

-   pleasant bodily feeling (sukha)
-   painful bodily feeling (dukkha)
-   happy feeling (somanassa)
-   unhappy feeling (domanassa)
-   indifferent feeling (upekkhā).

*Pleasant bodily feeling* and *painful bodily feeling* are nāmas. We can
call them ’bodily feeling’ because they are conditioned by impact on the
bodysense. When, for example, temperature which is just the right amount
of heat or cold impinges on the bodysense, the body-consciousness
(kāya-viññāṇa) which experiences it is accompanied by pleasant bodily
feeling. Body-consciousness is vipākacitta and in this case kusala
vipākacitta[(17)](#FOOT17). The pleasant bodily feeling which
accompanies this kusala vipākacitta is also kusala vipāka. Pleasant
bodily feeling cannot accompany any other kind of citta but the
body-consciousness, kāya-viññāṇa, which is kusala vipāka. Thus we see
that not every kind of feeling can arise with all types of citta.

Painful bodily feeling accompanies only the kāya-viññāṇa which is
akusala vipāka. When, for example, temperature which is too hot or too
cold impinges on the bodysense, kāya-viññāṇa which is akusala
vipākacitta experiences this unpleasant object. This akusala vipākacitta
is accompanied by painful bodily feeling. Painful bodily feeling cannot
accompany any other kind of citta but the kāya-viññāṇa which is akusala
vipāka.

Bodily feelings arise because of impingement of a pleasant or unpleasant
object on the bodysense. The kāya-viññāṇa cognizes the pleasant or
unpleasant object which impinges on the bodysense, phassa ’contacts’ the
object and vedanā experiences the “taste” of the object. The feeling
which accompanies kāya-viññāṇa is either *pleasant feeling* or *painful
feeling*, it cannot be indifferent feeling. In the case of the other
pañca-viññāṇas[(18)](#FOOT18) which are seeing, hearing, smelling and
tasting, the accompanying feeling is always indifferent feeling, no
matter whether the vipākacitta which experiences the object is kusala
vipākacitta or akusala vipākacitta.

The Paramattha Mañjūsā, a commentary to the *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, note
56) explains why kāya-viññāṇa is accompanied by either pleasant feeling
or unpleasant feeling. This is because of the ’violence of the impact’s
blow’; there is the direct impact of tangible object on the bodysense.
Tangible objects which are experienced through the rūpa which is the
bodysense are the following rūpas: solidity, appearing as hardness or
softness, temperature, appearing as heat or cold, and motion, appearing
as oscillation or pressure. By way of a simile the difference is
explained between the impact of tangible object on the bodysense and the
impact of the other sense objects on the relevant senses. When a man
places cottonwool on an anvil and strikes it with an iron hammer, the
hammer goes right through the cottonwool because of the violence of the
impact. In the case, however, of the other pañca-viññāṇas, the impact is
gentle, like the contact between two pieces of cottonwool. Thus, they
are accompanied by indifferent feeling. The ’impact’ of visible object
on the eye-sense is gentle when compared with the direct physical
contact of tangible object with the bodysense.

We may believe that bodily feeling can be indifferent, but this is not
so. The moment of body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) is extremely short;
it is only one moment of vipāka and after it has fallen away akusala
cittas or kusala cittas arise. Body-consciousness is accompanied either
by pleasant bodily feeling or by painful bodily feeling. The akusala
cittas or kusala cittas which arise shortly afterwards are accompanied
by feelings which are different from bodily feeling. They can be
accompanied by happy feeling, unhappy feeling or indifferent feeling.

*Somanassa,* happy feeling, can arise with cittas of all four jātis,
with kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta.

Somanassa is of the same jāti as the citta it accompanies. It does not
arise with every citta. Somanassa cannot accompany dosa-mūla-citta which
has aversion towards an object and it cannot accompany moha-mūla-citta,
citta rooted in ignorance. Somanassa can accompany lobha-mūla-citta but
it does not always accompany lobha-mūla-citta. Lobha-mūla-citta can be
accompanied by somanassa or by upekkhā, indifferent feeling. When
somanassa accompanies lobha-mūla-citta, somanassa is also akusala. There
can be pleasant feeling when one likes a pleasant visible object, a
beautiful sound, a fragrant odour, a delicious taste or a soft touch. We
would like to have pleasant feeling all the time, it often seems to be
the goal of our life. However, pleasant feeling cannot last and when it
is gone we are sad. We find it very important what kind of feeling we
have, but feelings are beyond control, they arise because of conditions.
Lobha accompanied by somanassa is more intense than lobha accompanied by
upekkhā.

Lobha-mūla-citta accompanied by somanassa arises when there are the
appropriate conditions; there is no self who can prevent this. If we
study the different types of feeling and the cittas they accompany it
will help us to recognize akusala cittas. If we would not know that
somanassa may accompany lobha-mūla-citta we would think that it is good
to have happy feeling. One may see the disadvantage of unhappy feeling
but does one recognize the disadvantage of all kinds of akusala, also
when they are accompanied by somanassa? Somanassa does not stay. When we
do not get the pleasant objects we are longing for our attachment
conditions aversion which is always accompanied by unhappy feeling. If
we realize the danger of all kinds of akusala, it can remind us to be
aware of the reality which appears. This is the way leading to the
eradication of akusala.

Somanassa can accompany kusala citta, but it does not accompany each
kusala citta. When we perform dāna (generosity), observe sīla (morality)
or apply ourselves to mental development, there can be somanassa or
upekkhā, indifferent feeling, with the kusala citta. We would like to
have kusala citta with somanassa, but for the arising of somanassa there
have to be the right conditions. One of these is strong confidence in
the benefit of kusala. Confidence (saddhā) is a wholesome cetasika which
accompanies each kusala citta, but there are many degrees of confidence.
When one has strong confidence in kusala, one will perform it with joy.
We read in the *Atthasālinī* (I, Part II, Chapter I, 75) that:

> ’abundance of confidence (saddhā), purity of views, seeing advantage
> in kusala, should be understood as factors of this consciousness in
> making it accompanied by joy’.

When someone has right view of realities, right view of kusala and
akusala, of kamma and its result, he will be firmly convinced of the
benefit of kusala and this is a condition to perform it with somanassa.

The pleasant feeling which accompanies kusala citta is quite different
from the pleasant feeling which accompanies lobha-mūla-citta. When we
give a present to someone else and there is pleasant feeling, we may
think that there is one kind of feeling which lasts, but in reality
there are different moments of feeling accompanying different cittas.
There can be a moment of pure generosity accompanied by pleasant
feeling, but there are bound to be many moments of attachment after the
kusala cittas have fallen away. We may be attached to the person we give
to or to the thing we give, or we may expect something in return; we
want to be liked by the person who receives our gift. Such moments of
attachment may be accompanied by somanassa. Somanassa which is kusala
and somanassa which accompanies lobha are different kinds of somanassa
arising closely one after the other, and it is difficult to distinguish
one from the other. It seems that there is one kind of somanassa and
that it lasts. Without right understanding we cannot tell whether the
somanassa which arises is kusala or akusala. Since there are many more
akusala cittas arising than kusala cittas, there are many more moments
of somanassa which are akusala than moments of somanassa which are
kusala. We cling to somanassa but we cannot choose our own feelings. Who
can control which feeling arises at a particular moment? Feelings arise
when there are the right conditions for their arising, they are anattā,
non-self. When a certain feeling appears it can be known as only a kind
of experience, no self in the feeling.

Somanassa can accompany kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sense-sphere,
rūpāvacara cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas) and lokuttara cittas. As regards
rūpa-jhānacittas, somanassa accompanies the cittas of four stages of
jhāna, it does not accompany the cittas of the fifth and highest stage
of jhāna. At this stage the citta is accompanied by upekkhā, which is
more refined and tranquil than somanassa.

*Domanassa*, unhappy feeling, arises only with cittas of the jāti which
is akusala; it always arises with dosa-mūla-citta, it does not arise
with lobha-mūla-citta or with moha-mūla-citta. It depends on one’s
accumulations whether dosa-mūla-cittas arise or not. When an unpleasant
object such as a disagreeable flavour presents itself, dosa-mūla-cittas
are likely to arise. If there is, however, wise attention to the
unpleasant object, kusala citta arises instead of akusala citta.

Dosa-mūla-citta can arise only in the sensuous planes of existence, it
cannot arise in the higher planes of existence where those who cultivate
jhāna can be reborn. In the sensuous planes there is clinging to the
sense objects and this conditions dosa. When one does not obtain
pleasant sense objects dosa is likely to arise. Those who have
cultivated rūpa-jhāna and arūpa-jhāna[(19)](#FOOT19) have suppressed
attachment to sense objects. They can be reborn in higher planes of
existence, in rūpa-brahma-planes and in arūpa-brahma planes and in these
planes there are no conditions for dosa. However, when they are reborn
in sensuous planes where there are conditions for dosa, dosa-mūla-cittas
accompanied by domanassa arise again so long as they have not been
eradicated. We dislike domanassa and we would like to get rid of it, but
we should understand that dosa can only be eradicated by the development
of the wisdom which sees realities as they are. There is no other way.
Only the ariyan, the noble person, who has attained the third stage of
enlightenment which is the stage of the anāgāmī (non-returner), has
eradicated clinging to sense objects and, thus, he has no more
conditions for dosa. Since dosa does not arise for the anāgāmī and the
arahat, they never have any more unpleasant feeling.

Dosa and domanassa always arise together. It is difficult to distinguish
between these two realities , but they are different cetasikas.
Domanassa is feeling, it experiences the taste of the undesirable
object. Dosa is not feeling, it has a different characteristic. Dosa
does not like the object which is experienced. There are many degrees of
dosa, it can be a slight aversion, anger or hate. But in any case dosa
does not want the object and domanassa feels unhappy. We know so little
about the different realities which arise. We may have a backache. Is it
painful bodily feeling which appears, or is it the characteristic of
domanassa which accompanies dosa-mūla-citta?

*Upekkhā,* indifferent feeling, is different from somanassa and from
domanassa; it is neither happy nor unhappy. Upekkhā can arise with
cittas of all four jātis, but it does not arise with every citta. When
there is no awareness many moments of feeling pass unnoticed. There is
feeling with every citta and when we do not notice any feeling there is
still feeling: at such moments there is indifferent feeling. We may not
feel either glad or unhappy while we are busy with our work or while we
are thinking. Then there is indifferent feeling. Indifferent feeling
accompanies vipākacittas such as seeing or hearing. It can accompany
lobha-mūla-citta; this type of citta can be accompanied either by
pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. Do we notice clinging which
is accompanied by upekkhā? When we walk or when we get hold of different
things we use in our daily life, such as a pen or a book, there is bound
to be clinging even when we do not feel particularly glad. We cling to
life and we want to go on living and receiving sense-impressions. We are
attached to sense-impressions such as seeing and hearing. There are many
moments of seeing and hearing and shortly after they have fallen away
there are bound to be lobha-mūla-cittas even when we do not have happy
feeling. After seeing has fallen away there is a mind-door process of
cittas which experience visible object through the mind-door and then
there can be other mind-door processes of cittas which think of
concepts. We may think of a person, a car or a tree. We *like* to notice
a person, a car or a tree, these are concepts we are familiar with. We
*like* to think and even when we do not feel glad there can be clinging
with indifferent feeling, but we do not notice this. It is useful to
know that lobha can be accompanied by upekkhā. Through the Abhidhamma we
can come to know our many defilements. It is better to know realities
than to mislead ourselves with regard to them.

Upekkhā can accompany mahā-kusala cittas, kusala cittas of the
sense-sphere. We may help others, observe sīla or study Dhamma with
upekkhā. Feeling is a conditioned reality, we cannot force ourselves to
have pleasant feeling while we apply ourselves to kusala. Upekkhā arises
with kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sense-sphere), rūpāvacara cittas
(rūpa-jhānacittas), arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas) and lokuttara
cittas. As regards rūpa-jhānacittas, only the cittas of the fifth and
highest stage of rūpa-jhāna are accompanied by upekkhā. At that stage
there is a higher degree of calm than at the lower stages; the upekkhā
which accompanies that type of jhānacitta is very subtle. All the
arūpa-jhānacittas are accompanied by upekkhā.

There are many different kinds of feeling and therefore we should not
imagine that it is easy to recognize feelings. When we study the
Abhidhamma we realize better what we do not know. It is difficult to
distinguish *painful bodily feeling* from rūpa, or from domanassa. When
we have pain, we ’feel’ that something is hurting and we may think that
it is easy to discern bodily painful feeling. However, we may not be
able to distinguish the painful feeling which is nāma from the rūpa
which is impinging on the body-sense. We are usually thinking of the
spot which is hurt and then we are thinking of a concept. The thinking
is a reality which can be known when it appears, the concept is not a
reality. It is important to know the difference between ultimate
realities and concepts. A precise knowledge of the different nāmas and
rūpas which arise each because of their own conditions will help us to
be less deluded about our life.

When hardness impinges on the body-sense, the kāya-viññāṇa cognizes the
hardness and the accompanying feeling experiences the ’taste’ of the
hardness. Time and again vipākacittas arise which experience pleasant or
unpleasant objects through the bodysense. There are hardness or
softness, heat or cold impinging on the bodysense, no matter whether we
are walking, standing, sitting or lying down. There is the experience of
hardness or softness time and again when we touch things or take hold of
them, but we are so absorbed in what we want to get or want to do that
we are unaware of the different experiences through the senses. The
feeling which is vipāka is different from feeling which is associated
with attachment or aversion. Pleasant bodily feeling which is vipāka is
not associated with attachment, and painful bodily feeling is not
associated with aversion. At the moment of pleasant bodily feeling there
is no attachment to the object; pleasant bodily feeling merely
experiences the pleasant object. At the moment of painful bodily feeling
there is no dislike of the object; painful bodily feeling merely
experiences the unpleasant object. After the vipākacittas which
experience pleasant or unpleasant objects have fallen away, akusala
cittas which are rooted in lobha (attachment), dosa (aversion) or moha
(ignorance) are bound to arise. Akusala cittas arise very often, because
we have accumulated many defilements. On the other hand, when there are
conditions for ’wise attention’[(20)](#FOOT20) to the object, kusala
cittas arise instead of akusala cittas. There may be, for example, after
the experience of tangible object, mindfulness of nāma or rūpa.

We have considered the characteristics of pleasant bodily feeling,
painful bodily feeling, happy feeling (somanassa), unhappy feeling
(domanassa) and indifferent feeling (upekkhā)[(21)](#FOOT21) . Although
all of them are the cetasika which is feeling (vedanā), they are
different kinds of feeling with different characteristics. At every
moment feeling is different, because at every moment there is a
different citta. For example, upekkhā (indifferent feeling) which
accompanies vipākacitta is different from upekkhā which accompanies
akusala citta or upekkhā which accompanies kusala citta. Upekkhā which
accompanies the jhānacitta of the fifth stage is different again. All
these feelings are upekkhā, but they are conditioned by different cittas
and accompanying cetasikas.

Since there is such a variety of feelings, it is useful to know more
classifications of feeling. Feelings can be classified by way of contact
through the six doors of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body-sense and
mind. Cittas experience objects through six doors and through these
doors pleasant and unpleasant objects are experienced. On account of a
pleasant object there is often lobha-mūla-citta which can be accompanied
by somanassa or upekkhā, and on account of an unpleasant object there is
often dosa-mūla-citta which is accompanied by domanassa. If we
understand that the experience of pleasant and unpleasant objects and
the different feelings which arise on account of them are conditioned we
will attach less importance to the kind of feeling which arises at a
particular moment.

The experience of pleasant or unpleasant objects through the senses is
vipāka conditioned by kamma, and the kusala cittas or akusala cittas
arising on account of the objects which are experienced are conditioned
by our accumulated tendencies. There is no self who can exercise power
over any reality which arises, there are only nāma and rūpa which arise
because of conditions. Sometimes there are conditions for indifferent
feeling, sometimes for pleasant feeling, sometimes for unpleasant
feeling[(22)](#FOOT22).

Cittas arise and fall away very rapidly, succeeding one another; there
never is a moment without citta and never a moment without feeling. We
cling to happy feeling, somanassa, but we know so little about ourselves
and thus we may not recognize the different kinds of happy feeling. When
we are laughing there is happy feeling with lobha-mūla-citta, but we may
not realize that there is happy feeling which is akusala. We should not
try to suppress laughing, but it is useful to know the different types
of realities which arise. When we see someone else there can be happy
feeling arising with attachment or happy feeling arising with kusala
citta. The cittas which think of the person we meet are akusala cittas
when there is no dāna (generosity), sīla (good moral conduct), or
bhāvanā (mental development).

Feeling is *saṅkhāra dhamma*, a conditioned dhamma. Feeling is
conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies. Feeling
which arises, falls away immediately, it does not stay. Feeling is a
*khandha*, it is one among the five khandhas, namely,
vedanākkhandha[(23)](#FOOT23). We cling to feeling and we take it for
self. If our knowledge of feeling is merely theoretical we will not know
feeling as it is. When there is awareness of feeling when it appears it
can be known as only a type of nāma and not self.

### Questions

1.  Through how many doors can pleasant mental feeling experience an
    object?
2.  There is a great variety of feelings, but all feelings have
    something in common. What is the characteristic they have in common?
3.  Feeling accompanies every citta. Can any kind of feeling accompany
    all cittas?
4.  Can everybody know the reality of pleasant feeling or of unpleasant
    feeling?
5.  Why is body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) never accompanied by
    indifferent feeling?
6.  Which jāti is painful bodily feeling?
7.  Which jāti is unhappy feeling (domanassa)?
8.  When an unpleasant tangible object impinges on the body-sense, can
    kusala cittas accompanied by somanassa arise which cognize that
    unpleasant object?