Introduction
============

     Not to do evil, to cultivate good, 
     to purify one's mind,
     this is the teaching of the Buddhas.
    
     Dhammapada, vs. 183 


The mind cannot be purified if we do not thoroughly investigate it. When
we try to analyse the mind it seems to escape us, we cannot grasp it.
The mind is variable, it changes very rapidly. At one moment there is a
mind with attachment, at another moment a mind with generosity, at
another moment a mind with anger. At each moment there is a different
mind. Through the Buddhist teachings we learn that in reality the mind
is different from what we mean by the word “mind” in conventional
language. What we call mind are in reality different fleeting moments of
consciousness succeeding one another very rapidly. Since “mind” has in
psychology a meaning different from “mind” according to the Buddhist
teaching, it is to be preferred to use the Pāli term citta (pronounced:
chitta). Pāli is the language of the Buddhist scriptures of the
Theravāda tradition. Citta is derived from the Pāli word for thinking
(cinteti). All cittas have in common that they “think” of an object, but
we have to take thinking here in a very general sense, meaning, being
conscious of an object, or cognizing an object.

The Buddha’s teachings explain in a very precise way the objects which,
each through the appropriate doorway, can be cognized by citta. For
example, colour or visible object can be known through the eye-door,
sound through the ear-door. Through each of the senses the corresponding
object can be known. Through the mind-door all kinds of objects, also
concepts and ideas, can be known. Before we studied the Buddhist
teachings we had a vague, general idea of a thinking mind and we did not
have a precise knowledge of objects which are cognized each through
their appropriate doorway. Citta is varied because of the different
kinds of objects it experiences. Seeing is totally different from
hearing.

Citta is varied because of the different mental factors or adjuncts
which accompany it in various combinations. The Pāli term cetasika
(pronounce: chetasika) is to be preferred to the English translations of
this term which vary in different textbooks. Cetasika means literally:
belonging to the mind (ceto). There are fiftytwo different cetasikas
which each have their own characteristic and function. Later on I will
explain the rationale of these cetasikas and their classification. There
is only one citta at a time, cognizing one object, and each citta is
accompanied by several cetasikas which also experience the same object,
but which each perform their own function while they assist the citta in
cognizing that object. They arise and fall away together with the citta.

Citta and cetasika are mental phenomena, nāma, which are real in the
ultimate sense. Ultimate realities or paramattha dhammas have each their
own characteristic, their own function, they are true for everybody.

There are four paramattha dhammas:

-   citta
-   cetasika
-   rūpa
-   nibbāna

Citta, cetasika and rūpa are saṅkhāra dhammas, conditioned dhammas; they
do not arise by themselves, each of them is conditioned by other
phenomena. Citta for example, does not arise by itself, it is
conditioned by the accompanying cetasikas. Nibbāna is the unconditioned
dhamma, visaṅkhāra dhamma or asaṅkhata dhamma; it does not arise and
fall away. Nibbāna is the object of the supramundane citta, lokuttara
citta, arising at the moment of enlightenment. What we call in
conventional language a “person” is in the absolute or ultimate sense
only citta, cetasika and rūpa. There is no lasting person or “self”,
there are only citta, cetasika and rūpa which arise and then fall away
immediately. Citta and cetasika are both nāmas, realities which can
experience something, whereas rūpa does not experience anything.

Citta and cetasika arise together, but they are different types of
paramattha dhammas. In order to explain the difference between citta and
cetasika the commentary to the first book of the Abhidhamma, the
*Atthasālinī*, uses the simile of the king and his retinue. The king is
the chief, the principal, and his retinue are his attendants. Even so
are the cittas which arise in our daily life the leaders in cognizing
the object, and the cetasikas are the assistants of citta. The cetasikas
have to perform their own tasks and operate at each moment of citta.
Citta with its accompanying cetasikas arise each moment and then they
fall away immediately.

The reader may wonder what the use is of knowing the details about citta
and cetasikas. Citta and cetasikas are not abstract categories, they are
active at this very moment. We could not see, hear, think, act, be angry
or have attachment without cetasikas. Seeing, for example, is a citta.
It is the citta which cognizes colour or visible object. In order to
perform its function it needs the assistance of cetasikas, such as
contact, which contacts visible object, or one-pointedness, which
focuses on the object. It is important to have more understanding of
cetasikas. We should know that defilements are cetasikas and that good
qualities are cetasikas. They arise in daily life and when they appear
we should investigate their characteristics. Otherwise we would not know
what is right and what is wrong. We would not know when defilements
arise and how deeply rooted they are. If the Buddha had not taught in
detail about defilements we would only have a vague idea about them. How
could we see the danger of defilements when they are unknown to us? How
could we develop what is wholesome if we would not know the
characteristics of wholesome cetasikas and the different ways of good
deeds? There is a great variety of cetasikas accompanying the different
cittas. Akusala cittas are accompanied by cetasikas which are
defilements, whereas kusala cittas are accompanied by cetasikas which
are good qualities. Apart from defilements and good qualities there are
also cetasikas which accompany cittas which are unwholesome, cittas
which are wholesome and cittas which are neither wholesome nor
unwholesome.

Citta and its accompanying cetasikas are closely associated and they
condition one another. There is a relationship and interdependence
between them. Citta conditions cetasikas. When the citta is wholesome,
kusala, all accompanying cetasikas are also kusala, even those kinds of
cetasikas which can arise with each type of citta. When the citta is
unwholesome, akusala, all the accompanying cetasikas are akusala.
Feeling, for example, is a cetasika which accompanies each citta. When
there is pleasant feeling, it can accompany kusala citta or akusala
citta rooted in attachment, but its quality is different in each case.
Cetasikas condition the citta they accompany, and the cetasikas which
arise together also condition one another. For example, the cetasika
understanding, paññā, conditions the citta and the other cetasikas it
accompanies. When the citta with generosity is accompanied by paññā
which realizes that generosity is kusala, the degree of kusala is higher
than in the case of kusala citta without paññā.

When there is generosity, there is no person who is generous, generosity
is a cetasika performing its function while it assists the kusala citta.
When there is attachment, there is no person who is attached, attachment
is a cetasika performing its function. The cetasikas which accompany the
citta experience the same object as the citta while they each perform
their own function. At one moment there can be attachment to colour
which is experienced through the eye-door, at another moment there can
be attachment to sound which is experienced through the ear-door, at
another moment there can be attachment to the concept of a person which
is an object experienced through the mind-door. Citta and its
accompanying cetasikas arise and fall away extremely rapidly. When right
understanding has not been developed we cannot distinguish between
different objects experienced through the different doorways. We are
inclined to join different realities together into a “whole”, and thus
we cannot realize their arising and falling away, their impermanence,
and their nature of non-self. Through the study of the Buddhist
teachings there can first be more understanding of the true nature of
realities on the theoretical level. Only through the development of
direct understanding of realities will one know the truth through one’s
own experience.

There is no abiding ego or self who can direct the operations of the
mind. There is a different citta all the time and it is accompanied by
different cetasikas. They arise because of their own conditions. We are
so used to thinking in terms of a mind belonging to the human person. It
is difficult to understand that there is no ego who can direct his mind,
who can take his destiny in his own hands and shape it. If everything is
beyond control where is the human dignity? If one walks the Buddha’s
Path one will know the difference between what is true in the ultimate
sense and what is only imagination or a dream. There will be less
delusion about the truth and there will eventually be elimination of all
that is impure and unwholesome. This is mental emancipation and is that
not the highest good one could attain?

The reader may find it cumbersome to know which types of cetasikas can
accompany which types of citta, and to learn the different
classifications of the groups of defilements. Such details, however,
help us to be able to see the danger of unwholesomeness and the benefit
of wholesomeness. When we know with what types of citta the various
cetasikas are combined we will come to understand the underlying motives
of our actions, speech and thought. Detailed knowledge will prevent us
from taking for kusala what is akusala.

In order to help the reader to understand the variety of cetasikas which
accompany different cittas, I shall first summarize a few basic points
on citta I also dealt with in my *Abhidhamma in Daily Life*.

Cittas can be classified in many ways and one of these is the
classification by way of “jāti” (literally birth or nature). Cittas can
be of the following four jātis:

-   akusala
-   kusala
-   vipāka (result)
-   kiriya (inoperative, neither cause nor result)

The cetasikas which accompany citta are of the same jāti as the citta
they accompany. Some cetasikas accompany cittas of all four jātis,
others do not.

Cittas arise and fall away very rapidly and we often do not know that a
different citta of another jāti has arisen after the present citta has
fallen away. For example, we may think that the present citta is still
vipākacitta, the result of kamma, when it is actually akusala citta with
attachment or with aversion on account of the object which is
experienced. Seeing, for instance, is vipākacitta. The moment of seeing
is extremely short. Shortly after it has fallen away, cittas rooted in
attachment, aversion or ignorance may arise and these are of a different
jāti: the jāti which is akusala.

Cittas perform different functions. For example, seeing is a function
(kicca) of citta. Seeing-consciousness which performs the function of
seeing arises in a process of cittas; it is preceded and followed by
other cittas which perform their own functions. Whenever there are
sense-impressions there is not merely one citta, but several cittas
arising in a process, and each of these cittas performs its own
function. It is the same with cittas arising in a mind-door process. As
for cittas which do not arise in either sense-door process or mind-door
process, they also have to perform a function. The rebirth-consciousness
(paṭisandhi-citta), the life-continuum (bhavanga-citta) and the
dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) do not arise in a process of
citta[(1)](#FOOT1). There are bhavanga-cittas in between the different
processes of citta.

Summarizing the cittas which perform their functions in a sense-door
process and then in the mind-door process[(2)](#FOOT2) when a rūpa
impinges on one of the sense-doors:

-   atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga)
-   bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga)
-   bhavangupaccheda (arrest bhavanga, the last bhavanga arising before
    the object is experienced through the sense-door)
-   five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness (pañcadvārāvajjana citta)
-   sense-cognition (dvi-pañcaviññāṇa, seeing-consciousness, etc. )
-   receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta)
-   investigating-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta)
-   determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta)
-   7 javana-cittas (kusala cittas or akusala cittas in the case of
    non-arahats),
-   2 registering-consciousness (tadārammaṇa-cittas which may or may not
    arise).

Then there are bhavanga-cittas and the last two of these, arising before
the object is experienced through the mind-door, are specifically
designated by a name. The process runs as follows:

-   bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga)
-   bhavangupaccheda (which is in this case the mind-door through which
    the cittas of the mind-door process will experience the object)
-   mind-door-adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta)
-   7 javana-cittas
-   2 tadārammaṇa-cittas (which may or may not arise).

After the mind-door process has been completed there are bhavanga-cittas
again.

I think that it is useful for the reader to review the enumeration of
cittas I have given above, since I, in the following chapters on
cetasikas, shall refer to cittas performing different functions in
processes and to cittas which do not arise in a process. All these
cittas are accompanied by different types of cetasikas.

The study of cetasikas will help us to have more understanding of the
intricate operations of the mind, of citta and cetasikas. It will help
us to understand in theory that citta and cetasikas act according to
their own conditions, and that an abiding agent who could direct mental
activities is not to be found. The study of the realities as taught by
the Buddha can remind us to investigate them when they appear in our
daily life. Theoretical understanding of the truth is a foundation for
the development of direct understanding of realities as they present
themselves one at a time through the six doors, through the senses and
the mind. Since the aim of the study of the Abhidhamma is the
development of right understanding of the realities of our life, I refer
in this book time and again to its development. Right understanding of
nāma and rūpa is developed by being mindful of them when they appear.
Sati, mindfulness or awareness, is a wholesome cetasika which is
non-forgetful, aware, of the reality which appears at the present
moment[(3)](#FOOT3). At the very moment of sati the reality which
appears can be investigated, and in this way right understanding will
gradually develop. Eventually nāma and rūpa will be seen as they are: as
impermanent and non-self. We should not forget that also awareness,
sati, is a cetasika arising because of its own conditions. If we have
understood this we shall not force its arising or try to direct it to
particular objects, such as this or that cetasika. The study of the
Abhidhamma can prevent wrong ideas about the development of the Buddha’s
Path. The realities of our life, including our defilements, should be
understood as not self. So long as we take defilements for self or
“mine” they cannot be eradicated. The direct understanding of realities
as non-self is the condition for not doing evil, for cultivating the
good and for purifying one’s mind.

In the chapters which follow I shall deal with fiftytwo different types
of cetasikas. I shall first refer to seven types of cetasikas which
accompany every citta. These are the *Universals.* Then I shall refer to
six types of cetasikas which can arise with cittas of four jātis, cittas
which are kusala, akusala, vipāka and kiriya (neither cause nor result),
but which do not accompany each citta. These are called the
*Particulars*. After that I shall deal with the *Akusala Cetasikas* and
finally with the *Beautiful (sobhana) Cetasikas.*