Moral Shame (hiri) and Fear of Blame (ottappa) 
----------------------------------------------

When we apply ourselves to kusala there is confidence, there is
mindfulness which is non-forgetful of kusala, and there are many other
sobhana cetasikas which each have their own specific function while they
accompany the kusala citta. Moral shame, hiri, and fear of blame,
ottappa, are two other sobhana cetasikas which accompany every sobhana
citta. Moral shame or conscientiousness has shame of akusala and fear of
blame has fear of the consequences of akusala. Every akusala citta is
accompanied by the opposites of moral shame and fear of blame, namely by
shamelessness, ahirika, and by recklessness, anottappa. Whenever there
is kusala citta there have to be moral shame and fear of blame.

There are many degrees of kusala and, thus, there are many degrees of
moral shame and fear of blame. The more paññā sees the impurity of akusala
and realizes its danger, the more moral shame and fear of blame will be
developed; they will abhor even akusala which is more subtle.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 142) gives the following definition of hiri,
moral shame (here translated as conscience), and ottappa, fear of blame
(here translated as shame):

> It has conscientious scruples (hiriyati) about bodily misconduct,
> etc., thus it is conscience (hiri). This is a term for modesty. It is
> ashamed (ottappati) of those same things, thus it is shame (ottappa).
> This is a term for anxiety about evil. Herein, conscience has the
> characteristic of disgust at evil, while shame (ottappa) has the
> characteristic of dread of it. Conscience has the function of not
> doing evil and that in the mode of modesty, while shame has the
> function of not doing it and that in the mode of dread. They are
> manifested as shrinking from evil in the way already stated. Their
> proximate causes are self-respect and respect of others
> (respectively)…

The words shame, scruples, fear or anxiety do not, in this case, have
the same meaning as in conventional language. When we think with
aversion or worry about our akusala there are akusala cittas. Moral
shame, hiri, and fear of blame, ottappa, do not arise with a citta
accompanied by aversion and worry; they accompany kusala citta.

Moral shame and fear of blame always arise together but they are two
different cetasikas with different characteristics. The *Atthasālinī*
(I, Part IV, Chapter I, 125-127) gives a similar definition as the
*Visuddhimagga* of moral shame and fear of blame and illustrates their
difference. The *Atthasālinī* explains that moral shame (hiri) has a
subjective origin, that its proximate cause is respect for oneself. Fear
of blame (ottappa) has an external cause, it is influenced by the
“world”; its proximate cause is respect for someone
else[(161)](#FOOT161).

Moral shame, as the *Atthasālinī* explains, can arise because of
consideration of one’s birth, one’s age, heroism (courage and strength)
and wide experience. Moral shame arises from consideration of one’s
birth when someone of a respectable family does not want to act as
someone who has not had a proper education. Moral shame arises from
consideration of one’s age when someone who is an adult does not want to
behave like a child. Moral shame arises from consideration of heroism
when someone does not want to act like a weakling but feels that he
should have courage and strength. Moral shame arises from consideration
of wide experience when one does not want to act like a fool who has not
learnt anything. It may happen that, although we have listened to the
Dhamma and see the value of having less attachment to self, we are still
selfish, disinclined to help others, or still easily inclined to anger.
However, there may also be moments that we remember that the Dhamma we
studied should be applied and that it is foolish to give in to
selfishness and anger. At such moments moral shame arises because of
consideration of what we have learnt, because of the understanding we
have acquired from the study of the Dhamma.

As we have seen, fear of blame, ottappa, fears the consequences of evil.
These consequences are manifold. There are many degrees of akusala kamma
and these produce different degrees of result, vipāka. Some akusala
kammas produce their results in the course of our life by way of
unpleasant experiences through the senses; when we are blamed by others
or receive punishment it is the result of kamma. There is also akusala
kamma which produces result by way of an unhappy rebirth. When we
consider the consequences of akusala we should not only think of the
vipāka it produces, but we should also see the danger of accumulating
more and more tendencies to akusala. Because of defilements we are
unhappy, we have no peace of mind.

Even if one has not studied the Dhamma one can still have moral shame
and fear of blame. One may not know very precisely what akusala is and
what its consequences are, but one can still appreciate the value of
kusala and see some of the disadvantages of akusala. There may be
stinginess or laziness as to kusala, but at the moment the value is seen
of kusala, moral shame and fear of blame which abhor akusala arise with
the kusala citta.

Moral shame and fear of blame are the proximate cause of sīla, morality.
We read in the *Visuddhimagga* (I, 22):

> …For when conscience (hiri) and shame (ottappa) are in existence,
> virtue arises and persists; and when they are not, it neither arises
> nor persists…

There are many degrees of sīla and thus it is evident that there are
many degrees of shame and fear of blame as well. When there are no shame
and fear of blame even as to gross defilements, one lives like an
animal. We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (I, Book of the Twos, Chapter
I, par 9) that if moral shame and fear of blame would not protect the
world there would be promiscuity between people, even between relatives,
as exists “among goats and sheep, fowls and swine, dogs and jackals”.
That is why moral shame and fear of blame are called the “guardians of
the world”.

There may be moral shame and fear of blame with regard to gross
defilements but not with regard to defilements which are more subtle.
One may not kill or steal, but one may have no shame and fear as regards
gossiping or unkind thoughts. We may often mislead ourselves as to
kusala and akusala. There are countless moments of clinging but we do
not notice them. When the citta is akusala citta there is ignorance
which does not know what is right and what is wrong, and there is also
shamelessness, ahirika, which has no shame of akusala, and recklessness,
anottappa, which does not fear its consequences. Through the Dhamma we
will know more precisely when the citta is kusala citta and when akusala
citta, and thus moral shame and fear of blame will develop.

Through the development of right understanding we come to see the danger
of all kinds of akusala, be it gross or more subtle. One may know in
theory that wrong view is dangerous, but there may still be the tendency
to take realities for self. When there is still a notion of self who
sees or hears, there is no shame and fear of akusala. When we consider
the difference between the sotāpanna who has eradicated wrong view and
the non-ariyan, it will help us to see the danger of wrong view. The
sotāpanna has no more conditions to commit gross akusala kamma which can
produce an unhappy rebirth whereas the non-ariyan still has conditions
for the committing of gross akusala kamma. Because of clinging to “self”
one becomes more and more enslaved to gain and loss, praise and blame
and the other vicissitudes of life. So long as defilements have not been
eradicated we have to continue to be in the cycle of birth and death.
Even if one cannot see the danger of rebirth one may understand that it
is sorrowful that defilements are bound to arise again and again.

We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Fives, Chapter IX, par 4)
about the factors which, if a monk possesses them, hinder the attainment
of the goal of monkhood, and about the factors which lead to the goal:

> Monks, possessed of five qualities, an elder becomes not what he ought
> to become…
>
> He is without faith (saddhā), modesty (hiri), fear of blame (ottappa),
> he is lazy and lacks insight…
>
> Monks, possessed of five qualities an elder becomes what he ought to
> become…
>
> He has faith, modesty, fear of blame, he is diligent and develops
> insight…

This sutta can remind both monks and laypeople that if there is no
development of understanding of the reality appearing at this moment,
people will not become what they ought to become: a person who has
eradicated defilements. If we remember the shortness of life there will
be more often moral shame and fear of blame which abhor laziness as
regards kusala. The Buddha reminded people not to be heedless, but to be
earnest, mindful at this very moment.

To the extent that understanding develops, moral shame and fear of blame
develop as well and they can become powers (balas). As we have seen, the
five sobhana cetasikas which are classified as faculties, indriyas, are
also classified as powers, namely: confidence, energy, mindfulness,
concentration and wisdom. However, in addition to these five powers also
moral shame and fear of blame can be classified as powers. We read in
the *Dhammasangaṇi* (par 30) about the power of moral shame, hiri, here
translated as conscientiousness:

The feeling of conscientious scruple which there is on that occasion
when scruples ought to be felt, conscientious scruple at attaining to
bad and evil states—this is the power of conscientiousness that there
then is.

We read (in par 31) about the power of fear of blame:

> The sense of guilt which there is on that occasion, where a sense of
> guilt ought to be felt, a sense of guilt at attaining to bad and evil
> states—that is the fear of blame that there then is.

A power is unshakable by its opposite. The powers of moral shame and
fear of blame cannot be shaken by their opposites shamelessness
(ahirika) and recklessness (anottappa), which arise with each akusala
citta.

The sotāpanna has moral shame and fear of blame which are unshakable by
their opposites with regard to akusala kamma which can produce an
unhappy rebirth. However, although he is on the way to eventually reach
the state of perfection, he has not eradicated all defilements. He still
clings to pleasant objects, he still has aversion. At the subsequent
stages of enlightenment moral shame and fear of blame become more
refined and at the moment of the attainment of arahatship they have
reached perfection.

We will not understand the functions of moral shame and fear of blame
merely by reading general definitions of them, but we have to consider
the difference between kusala citta and akusala citta when they arise in
our daily life. Then we will notice that, for example, the citta with
avarice is completely different from the citta with generosity. When
there is true generosity moral shame and fear of blame perform their
functions. However, in between the moments of generosity there are bound
to be moments of clinging and we may not notice these. We may be
attached to the object we give or we may expect the receiver to be kind
to us. Also such moments can be known. We should be grateful to the
Buddha who taught us to develop right understanding so that the present
moment can be known as it really is. Through right understanding we will
have more confidence in kusala and we will see the dangers and
disadvantages of akusala. Thus, moral shame and fear of blame will
develop.

### Questions

1. Why will moral shame and fear of blame develop to the extent that
 wisdom develops?
2. Why can moral shame and fear of blame be classified as powers?
3. What is the difference between moral shame and fear of blame of the
 sotāpanna and those of the non-ariyan?

