Non-Aversion (adosa) 
--------------------

Non-aversion or non-hate, is one of the three sobhana hetus, beautiful
roots. As we have seen, each sobhana citta is rooted in non-attachment
and non-aversion, and it may or may not be rooted in wisdom. We may
notice it when we have aversion, dosa, but we may not know the
characteristic of non-aversion, adosa. We dislike having aversion
because it is always accompanied by unpleasant feeling. When the
aversion is gone we may think that there is non-aversion but is that so?
At this moment there may not be aversion but can we be sure that there
is non-aversion which accompanies kusala citta? There may be attachment
to visible object and then there cannot be non-aversion at the same
time. Whenever non-aversion arises there has to be non-attachment,
alobha, as well and several other sobhana cetasikas which each perform
their own function while they assist the kusala citta.

Adosa can be translated as non-aversion or non-hate, but there are many
forms and degrees of it. Loving kindness, mettā, is a form of adosa
which is directed towards living beings. Adosa can also be non-aversion
with regard to an object which is not a being and then it can be
described as patience. There can be non-aversion or patience with regard
to heat, cold, bodily pain or other unpleasant objects.

The *Atthasālinī* (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 127) defines
non-aversion, adosa, as follows:

> …Absence of hate has the characteristic of freedom from churlishness
> or resentment, like an agreeable friend; the function of destroying
> vexation, or dispelling distress, like sandalwood; the manifestation
> of being pleasing, like the full moon…

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 143) gives a similar
definition[(166)](#FOOT166). Non-aversion has the characteristic of
freedom from savagery or violence, it is gentle like a good friend. We
may see the difference between aversion and non-aversion when they
appear in our daily life. We may be very annoyed about someone or
something, but when we see the disadvantage of aversion there are
conditions for patience. At that moment all the harshness which
characterizes aversion has gone and there is gentleness instead. There
is no self who is patient and gentle, but it is the cetasika
non-aversion, adosa.

The function of non-aversion is the removing of annoyance or vexation
and non-aversion is compared to sandalwood which has a very agreeable
odour and is said to cure fever. When there is aversion we are vexed and
annoyed; we burn with the fever of hate and we may become uncontrolled,
we may not know what we are doing. Aversion is like a fire, it is hard
to extinguish. However, when non-aversion arises we are cured of the
fever of aversion, all annoyance has gone.

Both aversion and non-aversion influence our bodily disposition. We read
in the *Atthasālinī* (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 129):

> …Absence of hate is the cause of youthfulness, for the man of no hate,
> not being burnt by the fire of hate, which brings wrinkles and grey
> hairs, remains young for a long time…

The *Atthasālinī* states that the manifestation of non-aversion is
agreeableness like the full moon. Non-aversion is agreeable both for
oneself and for others, it conduces to harmonious living among people.
Through aversion or hate a person loses his friends, and through
non-aversion he acquires friends. We read in the same section of the
*Atthasālinī* (129):

> …Absence of hate is the cause of the production of friends, for
> through love friends are obtained, not lost…

Non-aversion accompanies each kusala citta, it performs its function of
destroying vexation while we apply ourselves to dāna, observe sīla,
develop calm or insight. Dāna is an act of kindness. When we are giving
a gift with kusala citta we show kindness. When there is non-aversion
there must also be non-attachment which performs its function of
detachment from the object.

When we observe sīla there is non-aversion accompanying the kusala
citta. When we abstain from akusala kamma which harms both ourselves and
others we show an act of kindness. The *Atthasālinī* (in the same
section) states:

> Good-will is that which does not ruin one’s own or another’s bodily or
> mental happiness, worldly or future advantage and good report.

The Buddha reminded the monks to show acts of kindness to one another,
both privately and in public and this is to be applied by laypeople as
well. When there is true kindness it appears in our manners and speech.
When someone else speaks harshly to us it is difficult not to have
aversion and retort his speech with angry words. We are attached to
pleasant objects and when there is an unpleasant object our attachment
conditions aversion. When we see the ugliness of aversion and its
disadvantages there are conditions to refrain from harsh speech. When we
have aversion on account of what other people are doing or saying we
forget to be mindful of our own cittas. When there is mindfulness it
prevents us from wrong speech and then there is also non-aversion which
removes vexation.

We read in the *Kindred Sayings* (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Chapter XI, Sakka
Suttas, I, par 4) that Sakka, ruler of the gods, was reviled by
Vepacitti, an Asura (a demon). Sakka explained to Mātali, the
charioteer, that it was not because of weakness that he showed
forbearance. He praised patience and forbearance and he said:


   
 ``` 
 …Worse of the two is he who, when reviled, 
 Reviles again. Who does not, when reviled, 
 Revile again, a twofold victory wins, 
 Both of the other and himself he seeks 
 The good; for the other's angry mood 
 Does understand and grows calm and still. 
 He who of both is a physician, since 
 Himself he heals and the other too, 
 Folk deem him fool, they knowing not 
 the Dhamma… 

 ``` 


There are many opportunities for being impatient with people. We may be
irritated about someone’s faults and mistakes, about his way of speech
or his appearance. We may be irritated because someone moves slowly and
is in our way when we are in a hurry. Most of the time we are concerned
about ourselves but not about someone else. When we find ourselves
important aversion can arise very easily and then there is no kindness.
Selfishness and lack of consideration for others stand in the way of
kindness. When there are conditions for kindness and patience there is
peace of mind and then we can see the difference between kindness and
the harsh moments of aversion.

Kindness, mettā, is a form of adosa which is directed towards living
beings. Patience, as we have seen, is another aspect of adosa. There can
be patience with regard to beings and also with regard to objects which
are not beings, thus with regard to all objects which can be experienced
through the six doors. When there is aversion towards unpleasant objects
there is no patience. When we have to endure hardship it may be
difficult not to have aversion, but when non-aversion arises we can
endure what is unpleasant. The Buddha exhorted the monks to endure
unpleasant objects. We read in the *Middle Length Sayings* (I, no. 2,
Discourse on All the Cankers) that the Buddha spoke about different ways
of getting rid of the cankers and he explained that one of these ways is
endurance. It is to be understood that the cankers cannot be eradicated
unless right understanding is developed. We read:

And what, monks, are the cankers to be got rid of by endurance? In this
teaching, monks, a monk, wisely reflective, is one who bears cold, heat,
hunger, thirst, the touch of gadfly, mosquito, wind and sun, creeping
things, ways of speech that are irksome, unwelcome; he is of a character
to bear bodily feelings which, arising, are painful, acute, sharp,
shooting, disagreeable, miserable, deadly. Whereas, monks, if he lacked
endurance, the cankers which are destructive and consuming might arise.
But because he endures, therefore these cankers which are destructive
and consuming are not. These, monks, are called the cankers to be got
rid of by endurance.

When we feel sick or when we experience another unpleasant object
through one of the senses we may feel sorry for ourselves and complain
about it. We give in to aversion and we are apt to put off the
development of kusala until we are in more favourable conditions. Then
we overlook the opportunity for the development of kusala which is right
at hand: when there are unpleasant objects there is an opportunity to
cultivate patience. We all are bound to suffer from hunger and thirst,
heat and cold; these things occur in our daily life time and again. The
experience of an unpleasant object through one of the senses is vipāka,
the result of kamma, and we cannot avoid vipāka. After the moments of
vipāka have fallen away, there are kusala cittas or akusala cittas,
depending on whether there is “wise attention” or “unwise attention” to
the object. If we see the benefit of patience in all circumstances there
are conditions for non-aversion instead of aversion.

One of the hardest things to endure is the separation from those who are
dear to us. We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (IV, Book of the Sevens,
Chapter V, par 10) about Nanda’s mother, an anāgāmī, who had through the
development of right understanding eradicated aversion. After she had
offered dāna to the monks with Sāriputta and Moggallāna at their head
she testified to Sāriputta about marvellous things which had happened to
her. We read:

> “…Rajahs, for some reason, took by force and slew my only son, Nanda,
> who was dear and precious to me; yet when the boy was seized or being
> seized, bound or being bound, slain or being slain, I knew no
> disquietness of heart.”
>
> “It is marvellous and wonderful, O mother of Nanda, that you should
> have so purged the surges of the heart.”
>
> “Nor is that all, reverend sir…When my husband died, he rose among the
> yakkas[(167)](#FOOT167) ; and he revealed himself to me in his old
> form; but I knew no disquietness of heart on that account.”

Nanda’s mother then spoke about her purity of sīla, her attainment of
the different stages of jhāna, and she declared that she had eradicated
the “five lower fetters”. These fetters are eradicated at the attainment
of the state of anāgāmī.

The anāgāmī or “non-returner”, who has attained the third stage of
enlightenment, has no more attachment to sensuous objects and thus, when
there is an unpleasant object instead of a pleasant object, he has no
conditions for aversion. Nanda’s mother who was an anāgāmī, had no
sadness, fear or anxiety, no matter what happened to her. If we
understand that attachment to people can lead to utter distress when we
lose them, we may see the danger of attachment, and then we can be
reminded to develop right understanding which leads to the eradication
of all defilements.

In the development of right understanding patience has to be applied.
When there are many moments of akusala citta we should have patience to
be mindful even of akusala citta. When there is aversion we may be
annoyed about it, or we may take it for “my aversion”. When there is
mindfulness of aversion it can be known as only a type of nāma which has
arisen because of its appropriate conditions. At the moment of
mindfulness there is non-aversion, adosa, instead of aversion, dosa.

Loving kindness, mettā, is, as we have seen, a form of adosa which is in
particular directed towards living beings. The *Visuddhimagga* (Chapter
IX, 93) gives, apart from the definition of non-aversion, a definition
of loving kindness or mettā:

As to characteristic, etc. , loving kindness is characterized here as
promoting the aspect of welfare. Its function is to prefer welfare. It
is manifested as the removal of annoyance. Its proximate cause is seeing
lovableness in beings. It succeeds when it makes ill-will subside, and
it fails when it produces (selfish) affection.

Loving kindness can arise with right understanding or without it.
Someone may be kind to others because he has accumulated kindness, but
there may not be right understanding. If there is right understanding of
the characteristic of loving kindness it can be developed. It can be
developed as a subject of samatha, but one cannot succeed if one does
not practise it in daily life.

The “near enemy” of loving kindness is selfish affection, attachment.
Attachment tends to arise very closely after moments of loving kindness
but we may not notice this. We should find out whether we want to be
kind only to people we particularly like, or whether we are kind to
whomever we meet, because we are truly concerned for his welfare. From
our own experience we can learn to see the difference between loving
kindness and selfish affection. If we are attached to someone we will
miss him when he is no longer with us; attachment conditions aversion.
When there is loving kindness we do not think of our own enjoyment in
someone’s company. When loving kindness arises, there is detachment,
alobha, and also equanimity or impartiality (tatramajjhattatā).

When we are giving a gift to someone or when we are helping someone,
there may be pleasant feeling. However, instead of pure loving kindness
there can be attachment. We should remember that pleasant feeling can
arise with kusala citta as well as with citta rooted in attachment. We
find pleasant feeling very important and we tend to think that it is
kusala all the time, but we can easily be misled by pleasant feeling.

When loving kindness arises there is not necessarily pleasant feeling
all the time. Kusala citta can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by
indifferent feeling.

The *Visuddhimagga* (Chapter IX) gives advice for the application of
loving kindness for someone who is inclined to give in to anger. He
should review the danger in hate and the advantage of patience. A person
harms himself when he is angry. When he is angry with someone he should
not pay attention to the bad qualities of that person but only to his
good qualities, and if he has none he should be compassionate instead of
angry. That person’s accumulation of akusala will bring him sorrow. We
should remember that we all are “heirs” of our deeds, we will receive
the results of our deeds.

We could also regard the person we are angry with as five khandhas
(aggregates) or as elements which are impermanent. These arise and then
fall away immediately and, thus, what is then the object we are angry
with? The citta of the other person which motivated unpleasant speech or
an unpleasant deed has fallen away already and, thus, it belongs to the
past. Another way of overcoming anger is giving a gift. We can learn
from experience that, when we give a gift, there are conditions for
kusala citta both for the giver and the receiver. Giving and receiving
mellows the heart and the relationship between people can be improved.

We could also, in order to have less anger and more loving kindness,
reflect on the virtues the Bodhisatta accumulated. We read in the
*Visuddhimagga* (IX, 26) about the way of reviewing these:

> …is it not the fact that when your Master was a Bodhisatta before
> discovering full enlightenment, while he was still engaged in
> fulfilling the Perfections during the four incalculable ages and a
> hundred thousand aeons, he did not allow hate to corrupt his mind even
> when his enemies tried to murder him on various occasions? For
> example, in the Sīlavant Birth Story (Jātakas I, 261) when his friends
> rose to prevent his kingdom of three hundred leagues being seized by
> an enemy king who had been incited by a wicked minister in whose mind
> his own queen had sown hate for him, he did not allow them to lift a
> weapon. Again when he was buried, along with a thousand companions, up
> to the neck in a hole dug in the earth in a charnel ground, he had no
> thought of hate. And when, after saving his life by a heroic effort
> helped by jackals scrapping away soil when they had come to devour the
> corpses, he went with the aid of a spirit to his own bedroom and saw
> his enemy lying on his own bed, he was not angry but treated him as a
> friend, undertaking mutual pledge, and he then exclaimed:

 ```
 ``The brave aspire, the wise will not lose heart; 
 I see myself as I had wished to be.'' 

	(Jātakas I, 267) 

 ``` 


However, only reflecting on loving-kindness is not enough, it should be
practised. For example, when others talk to us we can listen to them
with loving kindness. When there is more right understanding of
realities there are more conditions for loving kindness in our
relationship with others. When we cling to a concept of “people” we tend
to be attached to an idea of having friends. We feel lonely when we are
without friends. In the ultimate sense there are no friends who exist,
there are only citta, cetasika and rūpa, and these arise and then fall
away immediately. Actually, friendship or loving kindness can arise with
the citta which thinks of a being. Loving kindness can be extended to
whosoever is in our company and then there is a moment of true
friendship. At such a moment there is no thought of self who wants
friendship from others, no feeling of loneliness or worry about the
attitude of others towards us. If we consider more the reality of loving
kindness instead of clinging to an idea of friendship there are more
conditions for unselfish love.

Loving kindness is one of the meditation subjects of samatha. Those who
have accumulated conditions for the development of calm to the degree of
jhāna can attain jhāna with this meditation subject[(168)](#FOOT168).
Loving kindness (mettā) is among the four meditation subjects which are
called the “divine abidings” (brahma-vihāras). The other three “divine
abidings” are: compassion (karuṇā), sympathetic joy (muditā) and
equanimity (upekkhā). They are called divine abidings because they are
excellent and of a “faultless nature”: those who cultivate them live
like the “Brahmā divinities” (*Atthasālinī*, I, Book I, Part V, Chapter
XII, 195). The divine abidings are also called “Illimitables”
(appamaññās) because they arise in an immeasurable field, their field or
object is beings without limits. Loving kindness, for example, can, when
jhāna is attained with this subject, be extended to all beings, none
excepted.

Loving kindness is sublime and it can be illimitable, but even the most
excellent qualities are impermanent and dukkha. Without the development
of right understanding good deeds, excellent virtues or even jhāna
cannot lead to the end of defilements. The final goal of the Buddha’s
teachings is the eradication of defilements and this means the end of
dukkha.

Through the development of right understanding the clinging to the self
can gradually decrease, and as a consequence there will be more
conditions for loving kindness and patience. One will be more inclined
to help others without selfish motives. There are many degrees of
non-aversion, adosa, and in the arahat non-aversion has reached
perfection. Those who have attained enlightenment, the ariyans, do not
have wrong view of people who exist; they have realized that there are
only nāma and rūpa, but they can still think of the concept “being”. The
arahat can think of “being” but he thinks of beings without any
defilements. Those who have eradicated defilements are truly kind to all
beings.

### Questions

1. Why must there be right understanding of the characteristic of
 loving kindness in order to develop it as a subject of calm?
2. Why is the “near enemy” of loving kindness attachment?
3. Can there be kindness with indifferent feeling?
4. Can there be non-aversion, adosa, towards an object which is not a
 being?

