## Right Effort of the eightfold Path

As we have seen in chapter 9, there are several aspects to kusala
viriya, right effort. It is a *factor of the eightfold Path* when it
accompanies right understanding and right mindfulness of the eightfold
Path and as such it is called *sammā-vāyāma*. This type of effort or
energy is not energy for mindfulness in the future, but energy for
mindfulness right now. When there is right mindfulness of any
characteristic which appears right now, there is also right effort
accompanying the citta at that moment.

We may find that mindfulness does not arise very often. It seems that we
lack a true “sense of urgency”, which is according to the *Atthasālinī*
and the *Visuddhimagga* the proximate cause of right effort.

The *Visuddhimagga* ( IV, 63) explains how there can be a greater sense
of urgency and how the mind should be encouraged. We read:

How does he encourage the mind on an occasion when it should be
encouraged? When his mind is listless owing to sluggishness in the
exercise of understanding or to failure to attain the bliss of peace,
then he should stimulate it by reviewing the eight grounds for a sense
of urgency. These are the four, namely, birth, ageing, sickness and
death, with the suffering of the states of loss as the fifth, and also
the suffering in the past rooted in the round (of rebirth), the
suffering in the future rooted in the round (of rebirth), and the
suffering in the present rooted in the search for nutriment. And he
creates confidence by recollecting the special qualities of the Buddha,
the Dhamma and the Sangha. This is how he encourages the mind on an
occasion when it should be encouraged.

The “states of loss” mentioned by the *Visuddhimagga* are the rebirths
which are “removed from the happy destiny” (XIX, 92, 93), they are
rebirth in the animal world, in the “ghost world”, in the world of
demons (asuras) or in hell planes.

Mindfulness right now can eventually lead to freedom from the danger of
rebirth. We may think with fear of unhappy rebirth and then there is
akusala citta with dosa, not mindfulness. However, we should remember
that even fear can be object of mindfulness. Shortly after the
dosa-mūla-citta has fallen away sati may arise and it can be aware of
whatever characteristic appears at that moment, no matter it is an
unpleasant object or akusala citta. When there is mindfulness there is
also right effort.

We may think time and again of the urgency of mindfulness, but in spite
of that we can notice that sati very seldom arises. We are impatient and
we find it difficult to persevere with the development of satipaṭṭhāna.
The suttas mention several factors which hinder “exertion, application,
striving”. We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Tens, Chapter
II, par4, Obstruction) about five mental obstructions which cause
wholesome qualities to decline:

> Herein a monk has doubts and waverings about the Teacher. He is not
> drawn to him, he is not sure about him...
>
> Again, monks, a monk has doubts about the Dhamma, about the Sangha (
> the Order of monks), about the training…he is vexed with his comrades
> in the brahma-life, displeased, troubled in mind, come to a stop. In a
> monk who is thus, his mind inclines not to exertion, to application,
> to perseverance, to striving…

We may doubt whether there can be an “ariyan Sangha”, people who have
developed the eightfold Path and attained enlightenment. We may have
doubts about the usefulness of sati right now, of mindfulness of visible
object, sound or any other reality which appears. At the moment of doubt
there cannot be right effort.

There will be less doubt and more confidence if we listen to the Dhamma
as it is explained by the right person, if we read the scriptures, if we
consider what we learnt and test the meaning of it ourselves. We can
prove the truth of what we learnt by the application of the Dhamma in
daily life.

The above-quoted sutta also mentions five “bondages of the heart” which
hinder the development of good qualities:

> …Herein a monk is not dispassionate in things sensual; desire,
> affections, thirsting, distress and craving have not gone from him…
>
> Again in body a monk is not dispassionate; he is not dispassionate in
> the matter of material shapes; having eaten his bellyful he lives
> given to the pleasure of lying down on back or side, a prey to torpor;
> or he leads the brahma-life with a view to join some order of devas,
> with the thought: By virtue of this way of life or practice or
> austerity or brahma-life I shall become some deva or other. Whatsoever
> monk …has such an object in view, his mind inclines not to exertion,
> to application, to perseverance and striving…

We are infatuated by all the pleasant things of life. At such moments we
forget to develop satipaṭṭhāna. We read in the same sutta that in the
monk who has abandoned the mental obstructions and the “bondages of the
heart”, “growth, not decline, in good states may be looked for.”
However, we should realize that not all obstructions can be overcome at
once. Even the sotāpanna who has eradicated doubt and who has an
unshakable confidence in the Triple Gem is still attached to
sense-pleasures. But he has no wrong view, he does not take attachment
or any other reality for self. He has developed right understanding of
all realities, also of akusala dhammas, by being aware of them when they
appear. The sotāpanna cannot deviate from the eightfold Path anymore.
Since he has realized the truth that all conditioned realities are
impermanent and dukkha, his urgency to be freed from dukkha does not
stem from theoretical understanding of the truth of dukkha, but from the
direct realization of the truth of dukkha. He has a true sense of
urgency which makes him persevere with the development of the eightfold
Path.

When one has just started to develop satipaṭṭhāna, sati does not often
arise. One may wonder how many years it will take before there can be
any progress. When we think of the goal with desire or when we are
afraid of failure there is akusala citta. We may not notice that there
is any progress, but even if there is sometimes one moment of
mindfulness of a reality appearing through one of the six doors, right
understanding can develop little by little. Sati which arises falls
away, but it is never lost, it conditions the arising again of sati
later on. Instead of having desire for enlightenment we should see the
value of right understanding at this moment.

When sati arises it is accompanied by kusala viriya, right effort, which
performs its function of strengthening and supporting citta and the
accompanying cetasikas, and in that way there can be perseverance to
develop right understanding. It takes great patience and courage, even
heroic fortitude, to persevere with mindfulness of all kinds of
realities which appear, also of akusala dhammas we would rather shun as
object of mindfulness.

Right understanding cannot be developed within a short time. The Buddha,
when he was still a Bodhisatta, had to develop wisdom for aeons. He
developed satipaṭṭhāna with great patience and an unshakable energy.
Energy was one of the “perfections” he developed together with
satipaṭṭhāna. He was willing to struggle and strive for an extremely
long time, without becoming disenchanted with all the hardship and
suffering he had to endure, all for the sake of the welfare of other
beings.

The *Dhammasangaṇi* (par13), in its description of the “faculty
(indriya) of energy”, speaks about “zeal and ardour, vigour and
fortitude, the state of unfaltering effort”, “the state of unflinching
endurance and solid grip of the burden.” The Bodhisatta, when he in his
last life was sitting under the Bodhi-tree, had unflinching endurance,
he did not let go of the task he had to fulfil. His vigour and fortitude
were unsurpassed. We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Twos,
Chapter I, par5) that the Buddha said to the monks that he did not
shrink back from the struggle and struggled on thus:

> “Gladly would I have my skin and sinews and bones wither and my body’s
> flesh and blood dry up, if only I may hold out until I win what may be
> won by human strength, by human energy, by human striving”. By my
> earnest endeavour, monks, I won enlightenment, I won the unrivalled
> freedom from the bond.

Many of the Buddha’s disciples developed the eightfold Path and attained
enlightenment as well. However, they also had to accumulate right
understanding during countless lives in order to attain enlightenment.
When we read about the lives of the Buddha’s disciples in the
*Thera-therī-gāthā* (Psalms of the Brothers and Sisters) we see that
they also, like we, had periods of slackness with regard to the
development of satipaṭṭhāna. However, ordinary events in their daily
life could stir them and remind them of the urgency to develop right
understanding.

We read that the Thera Uttiya (Thera-gāthā 30) had no purity of sīla and
could not attain enlightenment. The Buddha taught him in brief the
purification of sīla and the purification of view[(63)](#FOOT63) .
Uttiya developed insight and then he became ill. The Commentary to the
“Thera-gāthā” ( the Paramatthadīpanī) relates: “In his anxiety he put
forth every effort and attained arahatship”. He spoke the following
verse with reference to the event which stirred him to continue to
develop insight until he had reached the goal:


                                      
 ```                       
 Since sickness has befallen me, O now                                    
 Let there arise in me true mindfulness.                                  
 Sickness has now befallen me--t'is time                                 
 For me no more to dally or delay. 
   
 ```                                  


Sickness can remind us that we are not master of our body. What we take
for “our body” and for “our mind” are only conditioned rūpas and nāmas
which are beyond control. If we merely *think* of nāma and rūpa we will
not know them as they are. Mindfulness of the reality which appears now
is the only way to eventually know the true nature of realities.

The Buddha knew the accumulations of beings and, thus, whenever he
preached to someone he could remind him in the way which was most
suitable for him. He often reminded people of the foulness of “this
short-lived body”, in order to stir them to develop satipaṭṭhāna. The
Thera Kimbila (Thera-gāthā 118) was stirred when the Buddha, by his
supernatural power, conjured up the image of a beautiful woman and
showed her passing to old age. The Commentary relates that he was
greatly shaken by this image. He spoke this verse:


                                      
 ```                       
 As bidden by some power age over her falls.                              
 Her shape is as another, yet the same.                                   
 Now this myself, who never has left myself,                              
 Seems other than the self I recollect.
                                   
 ```                                  


Kimbila realized that what he took for self are ever-changing phenomena.
Although what we call in conventional terms the “present personality”
which has developed from the “past personality”, there isn’t any reality
which is self. The phenomena of the present moment fall away immediately
as soon as they have arisen and are completely gone. The commentary
relates that Kimbila, while he considered the truth of impermanence, was
yet more strongly agitated. He listened to the Buddha, became a monk and
attained arahatship.

There are time and again signs of foulness and decay in our body. Our
body is susceptible to decay, and death can come at any moment. We do
not know when the last citta of our life, the dying-consciousness, will
arise. For those who have accumulated conditions for sati the thought of
death can remind them to be aware.

We read that the Buddha’s disciples, when they were stirred by an event
in their life, “put forth energy and strove with passionate ardour”. We
read, for example, in the “Therīgāthā (29) that Sāmā could not find
peace of mind during the twenty five years she was a nun. In her old age
she heard a sermon of the Buddha which stirred her, and she attained
arahatship. We read that she said: “To free my path from all that causes
dukkha, I strove with passionate ardour, and I won!” When we read these
words we may misunderstand them. We are so used to thinking of effort as
effort exerted by a self that we can hardly imagine how there can be
effort arising because of its own conditions. Realities appear already
through the five senses and through the mind-door. Visible object, for
example, appears time and again. We could begin to investigate its
characteristic until it is realized as *just visible object appearing
through eyesense, not something or somebody.* There can be striving
without the concept of self who strives.

Even though we are only starting to develop the Path events in our life
can remind us to be aware now, just as they reminded the Buddha’s
disciples. At times we may have doubts about the benefit of sati, or it
may happen that we are absorbed by our work or our circle of friends, or
we may be infatuated by all the pleasant things of life, without
mindfulness of such moments. Although we know in theory that any reality
can be object of mindfulness, there may be a long period of sluggishness
in our life. However, a painful event such as the loss of someone who is
dear to us may remind us of the true nature of reality; this can become
our “goad” which stirs us. If we truly see that even one moment of right
understanding is beneficial we will have courage to continue with the
development of satipaṭṭhāna and then there is right effort which arises
because of its own conditions. We can come to understand that life
without the development of right understanding is utterly meaningless.

### Questions

1.  What can obstruct right effort?
2.  When we are thinking of the goal with discouragement, what can be
    done to persevere?
3.  How can signs of foulness and decay in the body be reminders of
    awareness of the present reality?
4.  Why is listening to the Dhamma as it is explained by the right
    person helpful for the arising of sati?