# Preface

This booK deals with the operations of the mind, citta, and its
accompanying mental factors, cetasikas. A detailed study of the many
types of cetasikas will help the reader to know his own defilements
and to develop good qualities and eventually, to eradicate all
defilements. Defilements and good qualities are different types of
cetasika. In this study I refer to my book *Abhidhamma in Daily
Life* which deals with the basic points of the Abhidhamma. It is
useful to read this book first in order to understand my study on
cetasikas.

The reader may wonder what the purpose is of the many Pāli terms used
in this book. In the course of his study he will see that the Pāli
terms are helpful for precision of understanding. I have used the Pāli
terms next to their English equivalents but the English terms often
have a specific meaning in the context of Western psychology or
philosophy. We should try to understand the correct meaning rendered
by the Pāli terms. 

In this study on cetasikas I have quoted from the first book of the
Abhidhamma, the *Dhammasangaṇi* (Buddhist Psychological Ethics).
I also used Buddhaghosa's commentary to this book, the
*Atthasālinī* (in English: The Expositor) and his encyclopedia on
Buddhism, the *Visuddhimagga*(in English: The Path of
Purification). Buddhaghosa's commentaries date from the fifth century
A.D. He edited in Sri Lanka old commentary works with utmost
conscientiousness and translated them from Singhalese into Pāli. The
reader will be impressed by the discriminative, refined knowledge of
all the details of the Buddha's teachings and by the vivid way he
illustrates points of the teachings with examples. He continuously
points to the goal: the development of insight in order to see
realities as they are. I quoted from the suttas texts which deal with
the development of all kinds of kusala, comprising the development of
calm and the development of insight. These texts can encourage us to
keep in mind the purpose of our study. Some people believe that the
Abhidhamma, the teaching on ultimate realities, is not the original
teaching of the Buddha. The Buddhist scriptures, the Tipiṭaka, consist
of the Vinaya (book of Discipline for the monks), the Suttanta
(discourses) and the Abhidhamma. The Abhidhamma enumerates all
realities and the different conditions for the phenomena which arise.
In order to show that the different parts of the scriptures are one,
that they are the Buddha's teaching, I quoted also from the suttas
texts which deal with ultimate realities. There is also Abhidhamma in
the suttas. In the suttas we read time and again that the Buddha spoke
about ultimate realities appearing through the senses and through the
mind-door. In order to understand the suttas some basic knowledge of
the Abhidhamma is indispensable. As we study the Abhidhamma we will
become more convinced that the Abhidhamma pertains to our daily
life, that it teaches about the phenomena we can experience at this
moment. As we continue with the study of the Abhidhamma we will be
impressed by the depth of its teaching. No ordinary person could
conceive such a detailed exposition of everything which is real,
except an Enlightened One.[(4)](#FOOT4)

The reader may find this book technical, but as he proceeds he will
find that a detailed study of realities helps him to understand his
daily life. 

I wish to express my deepest thankfulness to Ms. Sujin
Boriharnwannaket in Bangkok, who greatly assisted me in understanding
the Dhamma and its application in daily life. I based my study of
cetasikas on the lectures she held in the Saket Temple in Bangkok. I
also wish to express my appreciation to the "Dhamma Study and
Propagation Foundation" and to the publisher Alan Weller. With their
help the publication of this book was possible. All the texts from
which I quoted have been printed by the Pāli text Society. 

I will now continue with a general introduction in order to help the
reader to have more understanding of the nature of the cetasikas which
accompany the different types of cittas.

























