## The Stages of Insight

The realities which appear in our daily life are impermanent, dukkha and
anattā. We may have theoretical understanding of these three
characteristics of realities, but does understanding directly know the
truth? There may not be understanding which directly knows the arising
and falling away of seeing which appears now or of visible object which
appears now. We learn about “arising and falling away of realities”, but
instead of directly knowing the truth we can only think of the truth.
The realization of the impermanence of realities is not thinking: “It
does not last”. The impermanence of realities cannot be realized in the
beginning of the development of understanding. First understanding
should clearly know the nāma which appears as nāma and the rūpa which
appears as rūpa. Nāma and rūpa are different realities and they can only
be object of mindfulness one at a time, but we are still likely to
confuse their characteristics. In theory we know that nāma experiences
an object and that rūpa does not experience anything, but theoretical
understanding is only superficial. In order to develop direct
understanding of realities we should first know the difference between
the moments of thinking about concepts such as a person, body or house,
and the moments of mindfulness of only one reality at a time, such as
visible object, hardness or seeing. These are ultimate realities, each
with their own characteristic, which does not change, no matter how we
name it. One reality at a time impinges on one of the six doors and when
mindfulness arises it can be directly aware of that object, and at that
moment understanding can investigate its nature. In this way
understanding of realities can develop.

The realization of the truth of impermanence, dukkha and anattā does not
occur all of a sudden, it is the result of the development of direct
understanding in different stages. All through the different stages of
development of understanding the object is the same: nāma and rūpa which
appear at the present moment, in daily life. The object is the same but
understanding develops and sees realities more clearly. Thus, doubt
about realities and the wrong view of them are eliminated.

The first stage of insight, which is only a beginning stage, is the
understanding of the difference between the characteristic of nāma and
the characteristic of rūpa, not merely in theory but through direct
understanding of them when they appear. The first stage of insight is
called *Defining of nāma and rūpa*, or “Delimitation of Formations” (in
Pāli: nāma-rūpa-pariccheda-ñāṇa). The following stages of insight, which
are higher stages, cannot be realized before the first stage of insight.
Thus, the impermanence of, for example, seeing cannot be realized if
there is no clear understanding first of the characteristic of seeing as
nāma, different from rūpa. We know in theory that seeing does not stay,
that it must have fallen away when we think of a concept, but this does
not mean that the arising and falling away of seeing at this moment is
directly known. Seeing and visible object may still seem to appear
together, and then there is no mindfulness of one reality at a time but
only thinking about seeing and visible object.

The understanding of seeing and all the other realities is bound to be
vague in the beginning and it is useful to know what one does not
understand yet. Seeing arises and then it falls away immediately to be
succeeded by other cittas of the eye-door process which experience
visible object. When the eye-door process has been completed there is a
process of cittas which experience visible object through the mind-door;
they do not experience a concept but visible object which has only just
fallen away. Later on other mind-door processes of cittas which
experience a concept may arise. When one pays attention to the shape and
form of something and to the details, the object is a concept. Thus,
rūpas which impinge on the five senses are experienced through the
corresponding sense-door as well as through the mind-door. We are
confused with regard to the truth because it seems that seeing continues
for some time and that there is no mind-door process of cittas which
also experience the visible object which was experienced by the cittas
of the eye-door process. We do not notice the mind-door processes which
arise in between the sense-door processes, it seems that the mind-door
processes are covered up by the sense-door processes.

When the first stage of insight is reached, paññā which arises in a
mind-door process clearly distinguishes the characteristic of nāma from
the characteristic of rūpa, there is no confusion about their different
characteristics. Neither is there confusion about what the mind-door
process is; the mind-door process which follows upon a sense-door
process is no longer covered up, as was the case before the first stage
of insight occurred. At the moments of insight nāma and rūpa appear one
at a time in mind-door processes and at these moments one does not take
realities as a “whole”, there is no idea of “the world”, no idea of a
self. There is no self who can direct which nāma and rūpa are the
objects of insight, there is no particular order of their appearing. Any
nāma and any rūpa can be the object of insight and their different
characteristics can be distinguished from each other.

When the moments of insight knowledge, vipassanā ñāṇa, have fallen away
it seems again that realities appear as a “whole”, as the world.
Understanding is still weak. It depends on the accumulated wisdom of the
individual which kinds of nāma and rūpa have been penetrated by insight,
it may have been only a few kinds. The understanding which was gained at
the moments of vipassanā ñāṇa has to be applied again and again and one
has to continue to be mindful of all kinds of nāma and rūpa which
appear. The concept of self is so deeply rooted that it cannot be
eradicated at the first stage of insight. Understanding has to develop
further in order to eradicate it.

When the characteristic of nāma and the characteristic of rūpa can be
distinguished from each other, nāma and rūpa can be seen more clearly as
conditioned realities. Seeing arises, no matter we like it or not,
because there are conditions for its arising. Visible object conditions
seeing by being its object. If there were no object, seeing could not
arise. Seeing is also conditioned by eyesense which is its physical
base, a kind of rūpa produced by kamma. If kamma does not produce
eyesense there cannot be seeing. Seeing is vipākacitta, the result of
kamma. There is seeing of pleasant objects and of unpleasant objects and
nobody can cause the experience of objects to be pleasant. Contact,
phassa, is another condition for seeing. Contact is a cetasika which
arises with each citta and it “contacts” the object so that citta can
experience it. If there were no contact there could not be seeing. There
is no self who sees and can control the seeing; it is only a conditioned
nāma which arises for a moment and then falls away.

Every reality which arises is conditioned by different factors. The
seventh book of the “Abhidhamma”, the “Book of Conditional Relations”
(Paṭṭhāna)[(199)](#FOOT199) deals with twentyfour different types of
conditions (paccayas). When we study these we should keep in mind that
they occur in daily life. When paññā has been developed more by being
mindful of all kinds of realities appearing in daily life, the second
stage of insight can be realized. This is *Discerning the Conditions of
Nāma and Rūpa* (in Pāli: paccaya-pariggaha-ñāṇa). This is not
theoretical understanding of conditions, it is not thinking of all the
different conditioning factors for the arising of nāma and rūpa, but it
is the direct understanding of nāma and rūpa as conditioned realities.
Through direct understanding of the nāma or the rūpa which appears now
we will come to understand what our life is and how it is conditioned.

Just as nāma and rūpa which arise at the present moment are conditioned,
so they were in the past and so they will be in the future. We have to
continue to be born and to receive results of kamma because there is
still ignorance and craving and these condition rebirth. There is
clinging to the objects which can be experienced through the senses,
there is clinging to life. The clinging which arises today is
conditioned by clinging which arose in the past and which has been
accumulated and carried on from one life to the next life.

We may still doubt whether there is rebirth after the
dying-consciousness. If the citta at this moment is clearly understood
as a conditioned reality there will also be more understanding about
death and rebirth. Each citta which arises now is succeeded by the next
one. This also happens at the last moment of our life: the
dying-consciousness has to be succeeded by the rebirth-consciousness
which is the first citta of the next life. So long as there are
conditions for it there will be the arising of nāma and rūpa again and
again. Doubts about past life, present life and future life cannot be
overcome by theoretical understanding of the conditions for the arising
of nāma and rūpa, it can only be overcome by the direct understanding of
realities and their conditions.

Life exists in only one moment of experiencing an object. This moment
falls away and is gone completely, and then another moment arises. When
seeing arises, our life is seeing, when hearing arises, our life is
hearing. Each moment of life is impermanent and thus it is dukkha, we
cannot take our refuge in it. The cause of dukkha is craving. Very often
after seeing, hearing or the other sense-cognitions attachment arises,
but it may be so subtle that we do not notice it. We cling to seeing, we
also cling to thinking of concepts after the seeing, we want to pay
attention to shape and form. When we read there is usually attachment,
we have desire to know the meaning of what we read. When we are thinking
there are often akusala cittas with attachment, but we do not notice it.
When right understanding is being developed attachment can be known as
only a conditioned nāma, not self.

We read in the *Kindred Sayings* (II, Nidāna-vagga, Part XII, Chapter V,
par 43, Ill) that the Buddha, while he was at Sāvatthī, spoke about the
arising of Ill, dukkha, and its cause, and about the ceasing of dukkha
and the conditions for its ceasing:

> …What, monks, is the arising of dukkha?
>
> Because of sight and visual objects visual consciousness arises,
> contact is the clash of the three; feeling is conditioned by contact,
> craving by the feeling. This, monks, is the arising of dukkha.
>
> (We then read the same with regard to the other doorways.)
>
> And what, monks, is the passing away of dukkha?
>
> Because of sight and visible objects visual consciousness arises;
> contact is the clash of the three; feeling is conditioned by the
> contact, craving by the feeling. By the utter fading away and ceasing
> of the craving, grasping ceases, by the ceasing of the grasping,
> becoming ceases, by the ceasing of becoming, birth ceases, by the
> ceasing of birth, decay-and-death, grief, lamentation, suffering,
> despair cease. Such is the ceasing of this entire mass of dukkha.
>
> (The same is said with regard to the other doorways.)
>
> This, monks, is the passing away of dukkha.

We may read this sutta with theoretical understanding of realities, but
only through insight, through direct understanding of the truth, can we
grasp the deep meaning of this sutta. There are many degrees of knowing
the three characteristics of conditioned realities, of impermanence,
dukkha and anattā. After the second stage of insight has been reached,
understanding investigates more and more these three characteristics.
The third stage of insight is *Investigation Knowledge or Comprehension
by Groups* (in Pāli: sammasana ñāṇa, Vis. XX, 6). It may seem that
investigation knowledge is merely intellectual understanding, but it is
a stage of direct understanding, of insight. At this stage paññā clearly
realizes the succession of the nāmas and of the rūpas as they arise and
fall away very rapidly.

Even after the third stage of insight has been reached, insight is still
“tender insight” (taruṇa vipassanā). When insight is merely “tender” a
person can still deviate from the eightfold Path. The *Visuddhimagga*
(XX, 105) mentions “imperfections” which can arise: someone may cling to
his understanding, to tranquillity or to the assurance he has due to
this beginning insight. He may forget that also understanding is only a
conditioned reality which is not self. Or he may erroneously think that
he has attained enlightenment already and, thus, he may get stuck in his
development.

The imperfections of insight can only be overcome by continuing to be
mindful of all kinds of realities which appear. If one realizes that
also insight knowledge is only a conditioned nāma there will be less
clinging to it. There is no self who can induce the arising of the
stages of insight nor exert control over them. Those who are no longer
deluded because of the imperfections of insight, know what is the right
path and what is not the right path (Vis. XX, 129). If one does not
deviate from the right path anymore insight can develop and then a
following stage of insight can be reached. This is the first stage of
“principal insight” (mahā-vipassanā), namely, the *Knowledge of the
Arising and Falling away of Nāma and Rūpa* (udayabbhayā ñāṇa). As we
have seen, at the third stage of “tender insight” paññā realizes the
succession of nāmas and rūpas which arise and fall away very rapidly.
However, at this stage paññā is not keen enough yet to see the danger
and disadvantage of the arising and falling away of realities. At the
first stage of principal insight paññā realizes more clearly and more
precisely the arising and the falling away of a nāma and a rūpa as it
appears one at a time, and there can be more detachment from them.
Although realities are more clearly understood at each subsequent stage
of insight, the knowledge which was gained has to be applied and one has
to continue to be mindful of nāma and rūpa. Only thus the three
characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattā will be penetrated
more deeply.

There are nine stages of principal insight, mahā-vipassanā, in all
according to the *Visuddhimagga* (XXI, 1)[(200)](#FOOT200). In the
course of the development of insight there will be more detachment from
realities. Wrong views are more and more abandoned and there comes to be
a clearer understanding of the fact that conditioned dhammas cannot be
true happiness since they are liable to destruction and fall. The
following stage of insight, the second stage of “principal insight” is
*Knowledge of Dissolution* (in Pāli: bhanga ñāṇa). In order to be able
to reach this stage paññā has to investigate thoroughly all the
different kinds of realities appearing through the six doors. There must
be mindfulness of whatever reality appears in whatever situation one may
be. At this stage paññā pays closer attention to the falling away of
realities and sees more clearly that they are no refuge. There is a
beginning of detachment from the concept of self. The following stage of
insight is *Knowledge of Terror* (in Pāli: bhaya ñāṇa). This is not fear
which is akusala, it is insight which sees more clearly the danger of
all conditioned dhammas which are bound to cease. Each following stage
of insight marks a growing understanding of the disadvantages of nāma
and rūpa, of conditioned realities, since their true characteristics are
seen more clearly. At the moment a stage of insight knowledge arises
there is no clinging to nāma and rūpa, but such moments fall away and
then there tends to be clinging again. One has to continue being mindful
of realities and develop understanding of them until arahatship has been
attained. As paññā becomes keener it becomes detached from conditioned
realities and it wants to be delivered from them. It sees that
conditioned realities are meaningless, void, and that they have no
owner, that there is no self who can control them. Understanding brings
about more dispassion and equanimity towards conditioned dhammas,
although clinging has not been eradicated. When understanding clearly
sees the disadvantages of conditioned dhammas, and it has been developed
to the degree that enlightenment can be attained, then the stage of
insight which is *Adaptation Knowledge* (in Pāli: anuloma ñāṇa) can be
reached, and this arises during the process in which enlightenment
occurs. This process is as follows[(201)](#FOOT201):

- mind-door adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta)
- preparatory consciousness (parikamma)
- proximity consciousness or access (upacāra)
- adaptation or conformity (anuloma)
- change of lineage (gotrabhū)
- path-consciousness (magga-citta)
- fruition-consciousness (phala-citta, two or three moments, depending
 on the individual)

The mind-door adverting-consciousness of this process adverts to one of
the three characteristics of the reality which presents itself. The
preparatory consciousness, the proximity consciousness and the
adaptation which are mahā-kusala cittas accompanied by understanding
experience the same object as the mind-door adverting-consciousness.
“Adaptation” (anuloma) is the last citta in that process which has as
object a conditioned reality and penetrates its true nature. The
succeeding citta which is called “change of lineage” (gotrabhū) does not
experience the same object anymore as the preceding cittas in that
process; it is the first citta experiencing nibbāna (Vis. XXII, 1). It
experiences nibbāna but it is not lokuttara citta, it is mahā-kusala
citta. Change of lineage is intermediate between cittas of the
sense-sphere and the lokuttara cittas which succeed it.

Only one of the three characteristics of reality is penetrated by paññā
accompanying the mahā-kusala cittas before the “change of lineage”
arises; thus, the reality which appears is either seen as impermanent,
or as dukkha or as anattā. In the development of insight understanding
investigates the three characteristics, but it depends on the
individual’s accumulations which of these three is realized more often.
There can be thinking of the three characteristics, but when insight
develops and different stages of insight have arisen, the three
characteristics are seen more clearly by direct understanding.

At the moment of enlightenment the enlightenment factors accompany the
lokuttara citta. As we have seen, these are: mindfulness, investigation
of dhamma (which is paññā), energy, enthusiasm, tranquillity,
concentration and equanimity. The magga-citta eradicates defilements and
experiences nibbāna. The phala-citta which is the result of the
magga-citta also experiences nibbāna; it does not eradicate
defilements[(202)](#FOOT202).

It is useful to learn about the different stages of insight. It reminds
us that we have only a limited understanding of realities, but this
should not discourage us. The only way to develop insight is to begin at
this moment to be mindful of whatever reality appears. We cannot expect
the arising of insight-knowledge soon, not even during this life. We
have to continue to be mindful of nāma and rūpa and develop
understanding of them. Only when understanding has been developed it can
distinguish the characteristic of nāma from the characteristic of rūpa.
Throughout the development of insight the objects of understanding are
nāma and rūpa and one has to continue being mindful of them. Even when
the stage of the sotāpanna has been realized one has to continue
developing insight. The sotāpanna has realized the four noble Truths,
but there are many degrees of realizing them. Only when paññā has been
developed to the degree that arahatship is attained, it has reached
completion and then all defilements are eradicated.

As we have seen, there are many kinds and degrees of understanding:
intellectual understanding of realities, direct understanding of them,
developed in different stages of insight, understanding of the plane of
rūpāvacara citta (fine-material jhāna) and of the plane of arūpāvacara
citta (immaterial jhāna), and understanding which is lokuttara paññā.

As regards kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sense-sphere, which are
accompanied by understanding, there are four of the eight types of
mahā-kusala cittas, four of the eight types of mahā-vipākacittas and
four of the eight types of mahā-kiriyacittas which are accompanied by
understanding[(203)](#FOOT203). If someone is born with mahā-vipākacitta
accompanied by understanding he may, if he intends to develop higher
degrees of calm, be able to attain jhāna in that life. If someone
develops insight he may attain enlightenment in that life. If someone is
not born with mahā-vipākacitta accompanied by understanding he can still
develop calm or insight, but he cannot attain jhāna or enlightenment in
that life. As regards the mahā-kiriyacittas of the arahat, four of the
eight types are, as we have seen, accompanied by understanding. The
arahat can have mahā-kiriyacittas which are not accompanied by
understanding, for example at the moments when he does not preach
Dhamma.

All rūpāvacara cittas and all arūpāvacara cittas have to be accompanied
by understanding. Without paññā jhāna cannot be attained.

As regards lokuttara citta, the magga-cittas and the phala-cittas of the
four stages of enlightenment are accompanied by understanding which is
lokuttara paññā. When lokuttara cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors of
the different stages of jhāna are not taken into account, there are
eight lokuttara cittas accompanied by lokuttara paññā.

When lokuttara cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors of the five stages of
jhāna are taken into account, there are forty lokuttara cittas (five
times eight) instead of eight[(204)](#FOOT204) which are accompanied by
lokuttara paññā. The fact that lokuttara cittas can be counted as eight
or forty shows us that accumulations of different ariyans are not the
same. They all have eradicated the same kinds of defilements at the
subsequent stages of enlightenment, but they have accumulated different
inclinations and skills. Some had the ability to develop insight as well
as calm to the degree of jhāna and could attain different stages of
jhāna, whereas others did not have such skill.

Some types of sobhana cittas are accompanied by understanding, others
are not. Understanding is a cetasika, not self, and it arises only when
there are the right conditions for its arising. We may find it difficult
to grasp how the understanding of the reality appearing at the present
moment can develop to the degree that it leads to the eradication of
defilements. When someone merely begins to develop understanding he may
sometimes have doubts about the benefit of mindfulness of visible
object, seeing, sound or hearing which appears now. We should remember
that when there is less ignorance of realities there will be less
defilements. Ignorance is the root of all that is unwholesome. When
there is ignorance we do not know the benefit of kusala and the danger
of akusala, we do not know realities as they are. Ignorance conditions
wrong view. It is wrong view to take realities for self or to believe
that they last. When understanding begins to develop we cannot expect a
radical change in our behaviour. We are still selfish, we still cling to
the objects we experience, we are still angry, jealous and stingy. We
have to be sincere with ourselves when we develop understanding, we
should not pretend to be without defilements. Defilements are bound to
arise, but we can begin to understand that whatever reality presents
itself has arisen because of its appropriate conditions and is not self.
We cannot eradicate defilements merely by doing good deeds without
developing understanding of realities. Seeing realities as they are is
the only way that eventually defilements can be eradicated.

We read in the *Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Tens, Chapter III, par 3,
With Body[(205)](#FOOT205)) that wrong bodily action can be abandoned by
right bodily action and wrong speech by right speech. However, the three
unwholesome roots of lobha, dosa and moha can only be eradicated by
understanding. The text states:

> Which are the things, O monks, that can neither be abandoned by bodily
> acts nor by speech, but can be abandoned by wisely seeing them? Greed
> can neither be abandoned by bodily acts nor by speech; but it can be
> abandoned by wisely seeing it. Hatred can neither be abandoned by
> bodily acts nor by speech; but it can be abandoned by wisely seeing
> it. Delusion can neither be abandoned by bodily acts nor by speech;
> but it can be abandoned by wisely seeing it.

Attachment, aversion and ignorance are realities, they arise. They can
be object of mindfulness so that understanding can investigate them and
see them as they are, as not self. If we avoid being mindful of akusala,
it cannot be seen as it is and then it cannot be eradicated. At this
moment enlightenment seems far off, but we should not forget that
understanding begins by listening, memorizing and considering what one
has heard. Considering the nāma and rūpa which appear can condition
mindfulness so that there can gradually be direct understanding of
realities. Understanding which arises now is conditioned by many moments
of studying and considering in the past. It arises and then falls away,
but it is never lost since the conditions are accumulated for the
arising again of understanding and, thus, it can grow. Understanding
which is lokuttara is completely different from past moments of
“mundane” understanding, yet, it is conditioned by past moments of
insight and also by other good qualities, such as generosity, patience
and perseverance, which have been developed together with understanding.
Such good qualities should not be neglected, they can be helpful
conditions leading to detachment. Understanding develops gradually in
the course of many lives and, therefore, we should persevere in
considering the Dhamma in daily life and in being mindful of realities.

### Questions

1. Why can the arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa not be
 realized before the difference between nāma and rūpa has been
 clearly seen?
2. Through which doorway can insight knowledge realize seeing as it is?
3. Can there be clinging when we perceive a teacup?
4. When is there thinking with akusala citta?
5. What is the object of understanding all through the development of
 the different stages of insight?
6. Can aversion be the object of insight in the process of cittas
 during which enlightenment is attained?

