Understanding (paññā) 
---------------------

There are many kinds and degrees of understanding. There can be
understanding which is knowing the benefit of wholesomeness and the
disadvantages of unwholesomeness, there can be understanding which stems
from contemplation on the shortness of life. These kinds of
understanding can arise even when one has not listened to the Dhamma.
When one has studied the Dhamma there can be intellectual understanding
about ultimate realities, about kamma and vipāka, about nāmas and rūpas
which can be experienced through six doors, and, when understanding
develops further there can be direct understanding of ultimate
realities, of nāma and rūpa. Direct understanding of realities can
develop to the highest wisdom which eradicates all defilements.

Understanding, paññā or amoha, is among the six sobhana cetasikas which
do not accompany every sobhana citta. It is one of the three beautiful
roots, sobhana hetus. The two sobhana hetus which are non-attachment,
alobha, and non-aversion, adosa, accompany every sobhana citta, but
understanding does not. Whenever we perform deeds of generosity or
observe morality, understanding may or may not accompany the kusala
citta. But when we apply ourselves to mental development, bhāvanā, which
comprises studying the teachings and explaining them to others, the
development of samatha and the development of vipassanā, understanding
has to accompany the kusala citta.

When understanding accompanies the mahā-kusala citta (kusala citta of
the sense-sphere) which performs deeds of generosity or observes
morality, it may be of the level of intellectual understanding:
understanding of the benefit of good deeds and the disadvantages of bad
deeds, understanding of kamma and vipāka. However, when we perform deeds
of generosity or observe morality, there can also be the development of
direct understanding of realities.

As regards mental development, one cannot apply oneself with success to
this way of kusala without understanding. Also those who do not know the
Buddha’s teachings may reflect wisely on the truth that all things in
life are susceptible to change and that they do not last, and they may
develop calm. There were wise people also before the Buddha’s time who
understood the characteristic of true calm which is wholesome. Those who
understood the characteristic of calm and did not mistakenly think that
clinging to quietness was calm, could develop calm with a meditation
subject and in this way attain higher degrees of calm. Those who saw the
disadvantages of sense-impressions developed jhāna in order to be free
of them. Those who saw the disadvantages of rūpa-jhāna, fine-material
jhāna, which still has meditation subjects depending on materiality,
developed arūpa-jhāna, immaterial jhāna. The person who had become very
skilful in jhāna could develop “supernormal powers”, abhiññās, such as
magical powers, remembrance of former lives and the “Divine Eye”,
knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings. The cittas which
develop such powers are accompanied by understanding, but even this kind
of understanding cannot eradicate defilements.

The understanding which realizes the true nature of realities can
eradicate defilements and its development can only be taught by a
Buddha. This kind of understanding does not arise automatically, it has
to be developed. When one has listened to the Dhamma and reflected on
it, there can first be intellectual understanding of realities. If there
is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa when they appear in daily life direct
understanding of realities can gradually be developed. Eventually the
true nature of realities can be penetrated and defilements can be
eradicated at the attainment of enlightenment[(194)](#FOOT194).

Seeing realities as they are is the goal of the Buddha’s teachings.
Understanding should know what is real in the ultimate sense and what is
not real. So long as there is wrong view we cannot see things as they
are. People, animals and houses are not real in the ultimate sense, they
are only objects of thought. Nāma and rūpa are real in the ultimate
sense, they have their own characteristics which can be directly
experienced when they appear one at a time, through one of the six
doors. We can verify the truth of the Buddha’s teachings in being
mindful of realities and developing understanding of them. Then we will
be able to find out whether realities are permanent or impermanent,
whether or not there is a person or self who can control realities.

Every reality has its own specific characteristic by which it can be
distinguished from another reality (distinctive mark or visesa
lakkhaṇa). Seeing, hearing, hardness or sound have each their own
characteristic. However, there are also three general characteristics
common to all conditioned realities (samañña lakkhaṇa) and these are:
impermanence, dukkha and anattā, non-self. When understanding has been
developed it can eventually know realities as impermanent, dukkha and
anattā. There cannot, in the beginning, be clear understanding of the
true nature of realities. Understanding develops gradually in different
stages.

Direct understanding of realities is, as we have seen, different from
thinking about them. Direct understanding can only be developed by being
mindful of the nāma or rūpa appearing at the present moment. When there
is mindfulness of one reality at a time understanding can investigate
its characteristic and in that way it can gradually develop. When, for
example, hardness appears there can be mindfulness of its characteristic
and there is at that moment no thinking of a thing which is hard or of
the place on our body where hardness impinges. If we think of the place
of its impingement, such as a hand or a leg, we have an idea of “my
body” to which we tend to cling. By being aware of one reality at a time
we will learn that in the ultimate sense the body as a “whole” does not
exist, that there are only different elements which arise and then fall
away.

For the development of direct understanding of realities it is not
enough to know only the specific characteristics of realities, the
characteristics by which they are distinguished from one another.
Understanding has to be developed stage by stage, so that it will be
able to penetrate the three general characteristics of conditioned
realities: the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and non-self.

When we are absorbed in concepts and there is no mindfulness, we live as
in a dream and we do not know what is really there: only ever-changing
nāmas and rūpas. We read in the *Middle Length Sayings* (II, no. 54,
Discourse to Potaliya) that the Buddha pointed out in different similes
the dangers and disadvantages of sense pleasures. One of these similes
is the following:

And, householder, it is as if a man might see in a dream delightful
parks, delightful woods, delightful stretches of level ground and
delightful lakes; but on waking up could see nothing. Even so,
householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: “Pleasures of the senses
have been likened by the Lord to a dream, of much pain, of much
tribulation, wherein is more peril.” And having seen this thus as it
really is by means of perfect wisdom…the material things of the world
are stopped entirely.

We cannot really see parks, woods and lakes, because what is experienced
through the eyes is only the rūpa which is visible object. We can think
of the concepts of parks, woods and lakes, and the thinking is
conditioned by remembrance of past experiences. When we do not develop
understanding of the reality which appears through one of the six doors
and only pay attention to “wholes” such as gardens or houses, we believe
that we can possess them. When there is mindfulness of one object at a
time, such as visible object or hardness, we will understand that in the
ultimate sense we cannot own anything. We cannot possess visible object,
it can only be seen. We cannot take it with us; it arises just for a
moment and then it falls away. We cannot possess hardness, it can be
experienced through touch and then it falls away immediately. The
development of insight will lead to detachment, it will lead to the
eradication of the idea of a self who can exert control over things or
events.

When we learn that seeing only sees visible object we may have doubts
about the characteristic of seeing. It seems that there is all the time
paying attention to the shape and form of things or noticing the
dimensions of things. This is thinking, not seeing, the experience of
what appears through the eyes. If there were no thinking one could not
observe shape and form or dimensions of things. But such moments of
thinking are conditioned by seeing, by the experience of what appears
through the eyes. There are also moments of just seeing, moments that we
are not paying attention to details or focusing on a “thing”. It is the
same when we read a book. It seems that there are only moments of paying
attention to the shape of the letters and their meaning, but there must
also in between be moments of experiencing visible object, otherwise we
could not read. Before we studied the Dhamma we never considered what
seeing is, but if we learn to be mindful of one reality at a time
understanding will know realities as they are. We think time and again
of concepts and then the reality of thinking can be object of
mindfulness so that it will be known as non-self. Gradually we can learn
to be mindful of seeing, visible object, hearing, sound and all the
other realities which appear through six doors in our daily life.

Understanding is one of the wholesome faculties (indriyas), called the
“spiritual faculties”, which has to be developed together with the other
“spiritual faculties” of confidence, energy, mindfulness and
concentration. Through the development of these faculties the four noble
Truths can be realized.

Understanding is a controlling faculty, an indriya, in the sense of
predominance since it overcomes ignorance (*Atthasālinī* I, Book I, Part
IV, Chapter I, 122)[(195)](#FOOT195). It exercises government over the
associated dhammas (the citta and cetasikas it accompanies) by the
characteristic of vision, that is, the realization of the three
characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattā. The *Atthasālinī*
states further on (in the same section) that understanding has as
characteristic illuminating and understanding. It states (123) that just
as a clever surgeon knows which food is suitable and which is not,
understanding knows states as “moral or immoral, serviceable or
unserviceable, low or exalted, black or pure…” Understanding which has
been developed knows the four noble Truths.

The *Atthasālinī* then gives another definition of understanding:

> Understanding has the penetration of intrinsic nature, unfaltering
> penetration as its characteristic, like the penetration of an arrow
> shot by a skilled archer; illumination of the object as its function,
> as it were a lamp; non-perplexity as its manifestation, as it were a
> good guide in the forest.

The *Visuddhimagga* (Chapter XIV, 143) gives a similar definition.

Understanding is also a “power” (bala), because it does not vacillate
through ignorance (*Atthasālinī*, I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter II, 148).
As we have seen, when the wholesome faculties have been developed they
become powers which are unshakable. They cannot be shaken by their
opposites.

Right understanding of realities, sammā-diṭṭhi, is a *factor of the
Eightfold Path* and as it accompanies the other factors of the eightfold
Path they develop together so that the four noble Truths can be
penetrated. The object of right understanding which is not lokuttara,
supramundane, but “lokiya”, mundane, is the nāma or rūpa appearing at
the present moment. The object of right understanding which is lokuttara
is nibbāna. Right understanding which accompanies the lokuttara
magga-citta eradicates defilements; defilements are eradicated at
different stages of enlightenment and all of them are eradicated at the
attainment of arahatship.

Understanding is classified in several ways and, thus, its different
aspects can be seen. It has been classified as one of the seven *factors
of enlightenment* (sambojjhangas) and as such it is called
*investigation of dhamma*, dhamma vicaya. The factors of enlightenment
are mindfulness, investigation of dhamma, energy, enthusiasm, calm,
concentration and equanimity. These factors have to be developed
together for the purpose of attaining enlightenment. There has to be
“investigation” of the reality, the dhamma, appearing at the present
moment, over and over again before enlightenment can be attained and
defilements eradicated.

Understanding which is supramundane, lokuttara, can be classified by way
of three faculties:

1. I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown” faculty(an-aññātaññassāmī
 ’t’indriya), arising at the moment of the magga-citta of the
 sotāpanna[(196)](#FOOT196).
2. The faculty of final knowledge (aññindriya), which arises at the
 moment of the phala-citta, fruition-consciousness, of the sotāpanna,
 and also accompanies the magga-citta and the phala-citta of the
 sakadāgāmī and of the anāgāmī and the magga-citta of the
 arahat[(197)](#FOOT197).
3. The final knower faculty (aññātāvindriya), arising at the moment of
 the phala-citta of the arahat.

The sotāpanna still has to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa
because his understanding has not reached the degree that all
defilements can be eradicated. The task of developing understanding is
finished only when the “final knower faculty” has
arisen[(198)](#FOOT198).

When we learn about the different classifications of understanding we
can be reminded that understanding has to be *developed* in order to
reach higher stages. It should be developed in whatever situation in our
daily life we may be. We are inclined to think that awareness of the
present moment is too difficult, but that one day in the future we may
reach the goal. If we think that the present situation is not favourable
for the development of right understanding, it will not develop. We
should remember that each moment is in fact a new situation which is
conditioned and which is beyond control, and that it is therefore
useless to prefer another situation to the present one. We should not
worry about the situation we are in but we should be mindful of whatever
reality appears. There is for example time and again heat or cold.
Usually we think of a concept of “I am hot” or “I am cold”, but heat and
cold are only rūpa-elements and they can be objects of mindfulness when
they appear. There is no self who experiences heat or cold, it is nāma
which arises because of conditions. Through the development of
understanding one will be less inclined to cling to a concept of “I
feel” or “I experience”. It is only a type of nāma which experiences
something, a nāma which has arisen and then falls away immediately.
There can be a beginning of understanding when there is mindfulness of
what has already arisen at this moment because of its appropriate
conditions.

### Questions

1. Why can there only be direct understanding of realities when there
 is mindfulness of them?
2. Understanding is an indriya, a controlling faculty. What does it
 control?
3. What is the object of right understanding of the eightfold Path
 which is mundane, not supramundane, lokuttara?
4. We may find a particular situation too difficult, not favourable for
 the development of understanding. What should we do when we are in
 such a situation?