Wrong View (diṭṭhi)
-------------------

The Buddha taught the truth about all realities which appear in daily
life: seeing, hearing, attachment, hardness, softness, heat, cold and
all the other phenomena which can be experienced. However, we are
ignorant of the realities in and around ourselves and we have wrong view
about them.

What is wrong view? It is a distorted view of realities, a
misinterpretation of them. Do we, for example, know hearing as only an
element which hears or do we still cling to an idea of self who hears?
Do we know sound as it is, as only a reality which can be heard, or do
we take what is heard for a “person” or a “thing” such as a voice or a
car? Person, voice or car are concepts we can think of but which cannot
be heard. Hearing and thinking occur at different moments and these
realities experience different objects. Only one object can be
experienced at a time through the appropriate doorway, but we still have
many misunderstandings about reality. Through the study of the Dhamma we
may have acquired theoretical understanding of realities as being
impermanent and non-self, but wrong view cannot be eradicated through
theoretical understanding. It can only be eradicated through the
practice, through the development of the eightfold Path.

The *Atthasālinī* (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 248) gives the following
definition of wrong view, diṭṭhi: …It has unwise conviction as
characteristic; perversion as function; wrong conviction as
manifestation; the desire not to see the ariyans as proximate cause. It
should be regarded as the highest fault.

The *Visuddhimagga* (XIV, 164) gives a similar definition of diṭṭhi. The
*Dhammasangaṇi* (par38) calls diṭṭhi a “wrong road” and the
*Atthasālinī* (II, Part IX, Chapter II, 253) explains: …From being not
the right path, it is a “wrong path”. For just as one who is gone
astray, although he holds that this is the path to such a village, does
not arrive at a village, so a man of false opinions, although he holds
that this is the path to a happy destiny, cannot get there; hence from
being not the right path it is a wrong path…

Diṭṭhi has unwise conviction[(103)](#FOOT103) as characteristic. When
there is diṭṭhi one clings to a false view of reality. Its function is
“perversion”[(104)](#FOOT104): because of diṭṭhi one takes for permanent
what is impermanent, one takes for self what is not self. Ignorance
covers up the true nature of realities and wrong view sees them wrongly,
in a distorted way. Diṭṭhi is a factor of the wrong Path. If one follows
the wrong Path defilements cannot be eradicated and thus there will be
no end to the cycle of birth and death. Because of diṭṭhi someone may
believe that his wrong practice can lead to purification of defilements.
In the scriptures we read about people in the Buddha’s time who followed
different ways of wrong practice; they behaved like a dog or like a cow,
because they thought that such practices would lead to
purification[(105)](#FOOT105). So long as diṭṭhi has not been eradicated
there are conditions for deviating from the right Path, even though one
may have theoretical understanding of the right Path. The Buddha taught
that all realities which appear through the six doors can be object of
mindfulness. One may be inclined to think that it is not possible to
know nāma and rūpa which appear now, in daily life. Some people believe
that they have to follow certain rules with regard to the development of
satipaṭṭhāna, such as, for example, refraining from reading or talking.
They think that they have to go to a quiet place where there is no
noise, in order to have less akusala cittas. In the beginning we all may
be inclined to believe that we should not be aware of akusala dhammas,
but also akusala dhammas have characteristics which can be known and
understood. If they are not known as they are, as nāmas which arise
because of their own conditions, they cannot be eradicated. Even
dullness or forgetfulness of nāma and rūpa is a reality of daily life
and it has a characteristic which can be known. It is important to know
the difference between the moments of awareness and the moments of
forgetfulness. There is forgetfulness of realities very often but
sometimes mindfulness may arise and then we can learn the difference.

The proximate cause of diṭṭhi is “the desire not to see the
ariyans”[(106)](#FOOT106), being without regard for them. If one does
not listen to the Dhamma as it is explained by the “good friend in
Dhamma” and does not put it into practice, there are no conditions for
the development of right understanding. Instead of listening to the
right friend one may associate with the wrong person. We read in the
*Book of Analysis* (Chapter 17, par901) about evil friendship:

> Therein, what is “having evil friends”? There are those persons who
> are without confidence[(107)](#FOOT107), of wrong morality, without
> learning, mean, of no wisdom. That which is dependence on, strong
> dependence on, complete dependence on, approaching, approaching
> intimately, devotion to, complete devotion to, entanglement with them.
> This is called having evil friends.

Those who have accumulations for the development of right understanding
have conditions to meet the right friend in the Dhamma and those who
have tendencies to wrong view are bound to associate with people who
have wrong view and thus they accumulate more and more wrong view.

Wrong view should be regarded as the “highest fault”. Wrong view is
dangerous because it can lead to many kinds of evil. We read in the
*Gradual Sayings* (Book of the Ones, Chapter XVII):

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the arising
of evil states not yet arisen, or if arisen, to cause their
more-becoming and increase, as perverted view…

Monks, in one of perverted view evil states not yet arisen do arise, and
if arisen, are apt to grow and grow…

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the
non-arising of good states not yet arisen, or, if arisen, to cause their
waning, as perverted view…

Monks, in one of perverted view good states not yet arisen arise not,
or, if arisen, waste away…

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the arising
of perverted view, if not yet arisen, or the increase of perverted view,
if already arisen, as unsystematic attention[(108)](#FOOT108).

In him who gives not systematic attention perverted view, if not arisen,
does arise, or, if already arisen, does increase…

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt, when body breaks up
after death, to cause the rebirth of beings in the Waste, the Way of
Woe, the Downfall, in Hell, as perverted view…

We read of each case that the opposite is true for right view. Further
on, in the same chapter, we read that wrong view is compared to a
nimbseed, the seed of a creeper or of a cucumber:

> …Whatsoever essence it derives from earth or water, all that conduces
> to its bitterness, its acridity, its unpleasantness. What is the cause
> of that? The ill nature of the seed. Just so, monks, in a man of
> perverted view, all deeds whatsoever…conduce to Ill. What is the cause
> of that? Monks, it is perverted view.

Right view is compared to a seed of sugar-cane, paddy or grape:
“whatsoever essence it derives from earth or water, all that conduces to
its sweetness, pleasantness and delicious flavour.” Even so in a man who
has right view, all deeds conduce to happiness.

In order to have more understanding of the implications of this sutta we
should consider the difference between the life of the non-ariyan and
the life of the sotāpanna. The non-ariyan who has not eradicated wrong
view has conditions to commit akusala kamma patha which can lead to an
unhappy rebirth and thus he is in a dangerous situation. The sotāpanna,
who has eradicated wrong view, has no conditions anymore to transgress
the five precepts, he has no conditions anymore to commit akusala kamma
patha which can cause an unhappy rebirth. He has eradicated stinginess
and jealousy, he is full of generosity. When one does not cling anymore
to the concept of self and sees realities as they are, this will bear on
one’s actions, speech and thoughts.

Diṭṭhi does not arise with every type of citta. Diṭṭhi is connected with
clinging, it arises only with *lobha-mūla-citta*. There are four types
of lobha-mūla-citta which are accompanied by diṭṭhi
(diṭṭhigata-sampayutta), and of these types two are accompanied by
pleasant feeling (somanassa) and two by indifferent feeling (upekkhā).
They can be “unprompted” (asaṅkhārika, not induced by someone else or
oneself) or they can be “prompted” (sasaṅkhārika, induced by someone
else or by oneself)[(109)](#FOOT109). Diṭṭhi which arises with
lobha-mūla-citta always stands for wrong view, micchā-diṭṭhi.

There are many kinds of wrong views and they are of different degrees.
Three kinds of wrong view are unwholesome courses of action, akusala
kamma patha, through the mind, and these are capable of causing an
unhappy rebirth. They are the following three views:

1.  There is no result of kamma (natthika-diṭṭhi)
2.  There are no causes (in happening, ahetuka-diṭṭhi)
3.  There is no such thing as kamma (akiriya-diṭṭhi)

As regards the first view, this was taught by Ajita
Kesakambali[(110)](#FOOT110). He also taught that there is annihilation
at death.

The second view was taught by Makkhalī. He taught that there is no cause
for the depravity or purity of beings, that there is no human effort and
that all living creatures are “bent by fate, chance and
nature”[(111)](#FOOT111) .

The third view was taught by Pūraṇa Kassapa[(112)](#FOOT112). He denied
that there is akusala kamma and kusala kamma. The tormenting of others
is not an evil deed according to him.

Although these three views are distinct from each other, they are
nevertheless related. When one does not see kamma as cause one does not
see its result either, and when one does not see the result of kamma,
one does not see kamma as cause either[(113)](#FOOT113).

The above-mentioned three wrong views are akusala kamma patha through
the mind if one is firmly convinced about them. These three views in
particular are very dangerous, they can give rise to many evil deeds.

There are many other kinds of wrong views and, although they are not
akusala kamma patha, they are still dangerous. The scriptures often
refer to the *eternalistic view* and to the *annihilationistic view*.
Eternalism is the belief that there is a “self” who is permanent.
Annihilationism is the belief that there is a “self” who will be
annihilated after death. There is also a “semi-eternalistic view”: one
holds that some phenomena are eternal while others are not. One may
sometimes cling to the eternalistic view and sometimes to the
annihilistic view.

In the *Brahma-jāla sutta* (“The All-Embracing Net of
Views”[(114)](#FOOT114), The Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 1) sixtytwo
kinds of wrong view are mentioned. Of these there are eighteen
speculative theories concerning the past, and forty-four concerning the
future. There are speculative theories about the world being finite or
infinite, about the origin of the “soul” or the world. There are
speculations about good and evil and about nibbāna.

People of all times have been inclined to speculative theories and also
today we can see that such views still persist. When we speculate about
past lives and future lives we may cling to a “self” who “travels” from
one life to another. We are so used to thinking in terms of self. As
regards annihilationism, those who believe that there is a soul or self
who will be annihilated after death do not realize that the
dying-consciousness which falls away is succeeded by the
rebirth-consciousness of the next life so long as there are conditions
for rebirth. Annihilationism is different from the wisdom which sees the
impermanence, the arising and falling away, of nāma and rūpa. For the
arahat there are no conditions for rebirth, his dying-consciousness is
not succeeded by rebirth-consciousness. This is not annihilation, it is
freedom from the cycle of birth and death. The arahat has cultivated the
right conditions for the attainment to this freedom.

When the wrong view of self has been eradicated one will not cling to
speculative theories anymore. But so long as one still believes in a
self, one is bound to cling to speculative theories. We all have
accumulated “personality-belief” or “sakkaya-diṭṭhi”. We read in the
*Kindred Sayings* (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings about Citta,
par3, Isidatta) that the monk Isidatta said to Citta, the housefather:

> Herein, housefather, the untaught manyfolk, who discern not those who
> are ariyans, who are unskilled in the ariyan doctrine, who are
> untrained in the ariyan doctrine…they regard body as the self, they
> regard the self as having body, body as being in the self, the self as
> being in the body…

Thus, there are four kinds of the wrong view of personality-belief with
regard to “body”, rūpa-kkhandha. The same is said about the wrong views
with regard to the four nāma-kkhandhas of feeling, perception, the
“formations” or “activities” and consciousness. Since there are four
kinds of the wrong view of personality-belief, sakkāya-diṭṭhi,
concerning each of the five khandhas, there are twenty kinds of this
wrong view in all[(115)](#FOOT115). One may cling with wrong view to the
idea of “I see”, “my body”, “my will”. But they are only khandhas,
conditioned elements which arise and fall away.

There is wrong view with regard to nāmas such as seeing, hearing or
thinking, and also with regard to rūpas, such as hardness or visible
object. One may take a nāma such as seeing for self, and one may also
take visible object for a person or a thing which exists. When we take
things for self we do not see them as elements which can, one at a time,
be experienced through the appropriate doorway. Visible object is only a
kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the eyesense, it is not a
person or a thing, it falls away again. Sound is only a kind of rūpa
which can be experienced through the earsense, it is not a person or a
thing. Each citta which arises experiences one object at a time through
the appropriate doorway and then falls away, it is quite different from
the preceding citta. Seeing only sees, it does not hear, it does not
think. We read in the *Book of Analysis* (Chapter 16, Analysis of
Knowledge, par763):

> “Do not experience each other’s object” means: Ear-consciousness does
> not experience the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does
> not experience the object of ear-consciousness either.
> Nose-consciousness does not experience the object of
> eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not experience the object of
> nose-consciousness either. Tongue-consciousness does not experience
> the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not experience
> the object of tongue-consciousness either. Body-consciousness does not
> experience the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not
> experience the object of body-consciousness either…

One tends to cling to an idea of self who coordinates all the different
experiences. Someone may think that he can look at someone else and
listen to his words at the same time. The lists and classifications
which we find in the Abhidhamma are not meant to be used only for
theoretical understanding, they are meant to be used for the practice.
They are reminders to be aware of the reality which appears now so that
wrong view can be eradicated. When hearing appears there can be
awareness of its characteristic so that right understanding can know it
as it is: as only a type of nāma, not a self, who hears. We may have
doubts about the difference between the characteristic of hearing and of
the paying of attention to the meaning of the sound. We are inclined to
confuse all the six doorways. But hearing does not experience the object
of thinking. Intellectual understanding of realities can condition the
arising of mindfulness but we are usually infatuated with pleasant
objects and we reject unpleasant objects, we forget to be mindful. For
example, when we feel hot, we have aversion and then we are forgetful of
realities such as heat, feeling or aversion.

So long as wrong view has not been eradicated it can still arise when
there are conditions for its arising. Only through mindfulness will we
be able to know when it arises. When we think of concepts such as people
and things there is not necessarily wrong view. We can think of a person
with kusala citta, for example, when we have compassion for him. Or we
can think of a person with lobha-mūla-citta without wrong view or with
dosa-mūla-citta.

Wrong view has to be eradicated first before other defilements can be
eradicated. As we have seen, the non-ariyan, who has not eradicated
wrong view, still has conditions to neglect the five precepts; he still
has conditions for killing, stealing, sexual misbehaviour, lying and the
taking of intoxicants, including alcoholic drinks. When we understand
that the clinging to the concept of self causes us many problems in
life, that it leads to what is unprofitable, we may see the benefit of
the development of right understanding. If we really see the danger of
wrong view, it can condition the arising of mindfulness and thus right
understanding can develop. Right understanding can only develop if there
is mindfulness now, not if we merely think of ways how to have more
mindfulness later on.

### Questions

1.  What is an example of wrong practice which people may follow today?
2.  Why is the proximate cause of wrong view “not to see ariyans”?
3.  What is the difference between annihilationism, the view that a self
    will be annihilated after death, and the seeing of the impermanence
    of conditioned phenomena?
4.  In which way can one think of past lives with wrong view?
5.  Personality view can be eradicated through mindfulness of nāma and
    rūpa. Why is that so?
6.  Why does one not cling to speculative theories anymore when
    personality belief has been eradicated?
7.  When there is no awareness is there wrong view all the time?
8.  What is the difference between ignorance and wrong view?
9.  Why are the three kinds of wrong view which are akusala kamma patha
    particularly dangerous?
10. Why is it wrong to believe that we can see and hear at the same
    time?
11. Does the fact that wrong view has not been eradicated have any
    influence on our morality (sīla)?

